

Durham, N.C. - Yesterday, 46 Duke University undergraduates who are members of the men's lacrosse team responded to a legal order from Durham authorities and traveled downtown to be photographed and provide identifying information. The authorities made the request in connection with an investigation of an alleged incident on March 14 at 610 Buchanan St. in Durham. Duke University is monitoring the situation and cooperating with officials, as are the students.



Durham, N.C. - Physical coercion and sexual assault are unacceptable in any setting and have no place at Duke. The criminal allegations against three members of our men's lacrosse team, if verified, will warrant very serious penalties. The facts are not yet established, however, and there are very different versions of the central events. No charges have been filed, and in our system of law, people are presumed innocent until proven guilty. We also know that many members of the team, including some who were asked to provide DNA samples, did not attend the party. I urge everyone to cooperate to the fullest with the police inquiry while we wait to learn the truth. Whatever that inquiry may show, it is already clear that many students acted in a manner inappropriate to a Duke team member in participating in the March 13 party. I applaud Athletics Director Joe Alleva for responding to the conduct that is not in question even as we wait for the investigation to determine the truth about disputed parts of the events.



Durham, N.C. - I completely agree with President Brodhead's statement and appreciate his leadership throughout this trying situation. As unsettling as this has been for our entire community, dealing with difficult circumstances is part of the educational process. In a meeting this morning, our student-athletes made it clear to us that their behavior was inappropriate and recommended the suspension of their own season until the legal process is complete. Both President Brodhead and I agreed with them. Quite simply, it would not be in the best interest of the student-athletes, the coaches, or our entire University community to continue competition given the seriousness of the allegations. The Duke University Department of Athletics has always attempted to maintain the highest standards on and off the playing fields, and we will continue to do so as we move beyond the uncertainty in this current situation involving our lacrosse program.



Durham, N.C. - "The captains of the team met this morning with President Brodhead, and expressed sincere regret over the lapse in judgment in having the party on March 13 which has caused so much anguish for the Duke community and shame to our families and ourselves. "We also stated unequivocally that any allegation that a sexual assault or rape occurred is totally and transparently false. "The team has cooperated with the police in their investigation. We have provided authorities with DNA samples. The understanding is that the results of the DNA testing will be available sometime next week. The DNA results will demonstrate that these allegations are absolutely false. "Because of the intense emotions surrounding these allegations, we feel it is in the best interest of the University, the community and our families that the team should not play competitively until the DNA results verify our unequivocal denial of these allegations."



Durham, N.C. - Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead announced Tuesday that the university is suspending future games of the men's lacrosse team until there is a clearer resolution of the legal situation involving team members. The action, made in response to a request from team members, follows allegations of a sexual assault of a woman hired as a private dancer at a party attended by team members March 13 at 610 N. Buchanan Blvd. Durham police are currently looking into the allegations, but no charges have been filed. Brodhead issued the following statement: "This past weekend, Duke University's Director of Athletics Joe Alleva decided to forfeit last Saturday's and today's scheduled men's lacrosse games. His decision, which I fully supported, was based on facts team members have acknowledged about their March 13 party. A majority of the team members attended the party, which included underage drinking and the hiring of private party dancers. This conduct was wholly inappropriate to the values of our athletics program and the university. Forfeiting two games was a substantial penalty for a team that hoped to compete for the national championship. Director Alleva made clear that this move was not a punishment for pending allegations that team members deny and that remain unresolved. "As we move past the period of the two forfeitures, the question arises what to do now. This afternoon the captains of the Duke lacrosse team notified Mr. Alleva and me that the team wished to suspend competitive play until the DNA results come back. I met with the captains this morning and they expressed regret for their errors of judgment and the embarrassment they had caused themselves, their families, the athletic department and the university. They repeated their denial of the criminal allegations that have been widely reported against three of the players. "Athletics Director Alleva and I welcomed these initiatives from the students. We believe that suspension of play is the right course of action, and we also see the importance of their taking responsibility for their conduct. In a slight modification, I have decided that future games should be suspended until there is a clearer resolution of the legal situation. I shared the decision this afternoon with the trustees, who fully support it. "Let me explain my own thinking about the suspension of team play. Physical coercion and sexual assault are unacceptable in any setting and will not be tolerated at Duke. As none of us would choose to be the object of such conduct, so none of us has the right to subject another person to such behavior. Since they run counter to such fundamental values, the claims against our players, if verified, will warrant very serious penalties, both from the university and in the courts. The university community is based on mutual respect among all its members and for those in the larger community. We are all obliged to live up to these values to create the world where we all can thrive. "I feel these things deeply; but there is another principle at stake as well. The facts of the March 13 episode remain unclear and there are very different accounts of the central events. No one has been charged by the police, and we know that many members of the lacrosse team, including some who were asked to provide DNA samples, did not attend the party. To determine responsibility, we need to learn the full truth as quickly as possible. While I have urged and do urge everyone to cooperate with this inquiry, unavoidably, we have to look to the Durham police to take the lead in the investigation. Duke does not have the power to compel testimony from citizens of this city, and it lacks access to warrants, DNA records and other confidential information. I have confidence in the authorities to find the truth and to take whatever legal steps are necessary in the best interests of the community. "While we await the results of the investigation, I remind everyone that under our system of law, people are presumed innocent until proven guilty. One deep value the university is committed to is protecting us all from coercion and assault. An equally central value is that we must not judge each other on the basis of opinion or strong feeling rather than evidence of actual conduct. "In this painful period of uncertainty, it is clear to me, as it was to the players, that it would be inappropriate to resume the normal schedule of play. Sports have their time and place, but when an issue of this gravity is in question, it is not the time to be playing games."



Durham, N.C. -  Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead announced Tuesday that the university is suspending future games of the men's lacrosse team until there is a clearer resolution of the legal situation involving team members. The action, made in response to a request from team members, follows allegations of a sexual assault of a woman hired as a private dancer at a party attended by team members March 13 at 610 N. Buchanan Blvd. Durham police are currently looking into the allegations, but no charges have been filed. The action is the latest and strongest step in a controversy that has embroiled the university and the local community for more than a week. Brodhead spoke before more than 40 members of the national and local media in the Old Trinity Room of the West Union Building. Outside, several dozen students and community members held a protest, holding up signs challenging the university to take a stronger stand. In his statement and answers to the media, Brodhead made a distinction between the acknowledged behavior of the students, which he described as "wholly inappropriate to the values of our athletics program and the university," and the more serious allegations of rape. The acknowledged behavior was significant enough that this past weekend, the university had forfeited two games. At the same time, Brodhead insisted that the lacrosse team members had the right to be presumed innocent and that the suspension of the games was not a punishment but rather recognition of the seriousness of the issues. "In this painful period of uncertainty, it is clear to me, as it was to the players, that it would be inappropriate to resume the normal schedule of play," Brodhead said. "Sports have their time and place, but when an issue of this gravity is in question, it is not the time to be playing games." Brodhead said the suspension of games was decided following a meeting with Director of Athletics Joe Alleva and the three captains of the lacrosse team earlier Tuesday. "This afternoon the captains of the Duke lacrosse team notified Mr. Alleva and me that the team wished to suspend competitive play until the DNA results come back," Brodhead said. "I met with the captains this morning and they expressed regret for their errors of judgment and the embarrassment they had caused themselves, their families, the athletic department and the university. They repeated their denial of the criminal allegations that have been widely reported against three of the players. "Athletics Director Alleva and I welcomed these initiatives from the students. We believe that suspension of play is the right course of action, and we also see the importance of their taking responsibility for their conduct. In a slight modification, I have decided that future games should be suspended until there is a clearer resolution of the legal situation. I shared the decision this afternoon with the trustees, who fully support it." Brodhead repeated earlier assertions that the university took the allegations of rape very seriously. "Physical coercion and sexual assault are unacceptable in any setting and will not be tolerated at Duke. As none of us would choose to be the object of such conduct, so none of us has the right to subject another person to such behavior. Since they run counter to such fundamental values, the claims against our players, if verified, will warrant very serious penalties, both from the university and in the courts." The captains of the lacrosse team also issued a statement expressing contrition for their acknowledged behavior at the party. At the same time, the captains denied the rape allegations and said in their statement that "the team has cooperated with the police in their investigation. We have provided authorities with DNA samples. The understanding is that the results of the DNA testing will be available sometime next week. The DNA results will demonstrate that these allegations are absolutely false." The team members were not at the news conference and have not answered questions from the press. Brodhead told reporters he had urged them to speak openly. "I can only assume that they have legal counsel who has foreseen complexities if they do so," he said. Brodhead added that university officials spoke to members of the team within 24 hours of the incident. The university's initial response was based on the information it had at the time. As more information became available from Durham police, Brodhead said, the university ratcheted up its response. "A lot of this story is known to the police but unknown to us," he said. "Our understanding is partial. We got information obliquely from the police. As the gravity of the allegations has grown, we have also responded at a higher level." The team will continue to practice, Brodhead said, but the suspension of games will have serious implications for a team that was ranked second in the nation before the incident and had realistic aspirations for a national title. Alleva said such a suspension was rare in NCAA history. Neither Alleva nor Brodhead could state what would be the criteria for the resumption of games, but said that decision would occur only if more information made it appropriate. Brodhead discussed his hope that the incident not interfere with Duke's growing ties with N.C. Central University, where the woman involved in the incident is reported to be a student. He also expressed concern about how the incident may affect Duke's relations with the surrounding community, noting with irony that the 610 N. Buchanan Blvd. house is one of 15 properties recently purchased by the university. "We have a good history of stabilizing neighborhoods," he said. "When we decided to purchase these properties, it was our intention to turn them around and sell them to single families, to do something good for the neighborhoods. Nothing about this incident has persuaded me that our decision was wrong." Following the conference, Brodhead went outside to meet with the demonstrating students, repeating that the university has responded appropriately but would continue to presume the innocence of the team members. Students shouted out questions at Brodhead. One said she felt unsafe on her own campus. Others complained that it took the university too long to alert the students to the incident. The short meeting broke up after Brodhead invited the students to meet with him Wednesday morning.



Durham, N.C. - President Richard H. Brodhead told a group of Duke University students Wednesday morning that "we can't promise you there will never be instances of disgusting and disturbing things." But he called on students and the larger community to recognize how they can learn from controversies such as the one that has emerged around the men's lacrosse team. Noting how the situation has focused attention on difficult issues such as race relations, Brodhead said "we have to use this as a moment to reflect on the meaning of these things," adding that "it's not every day the mind opens to a certain subject." The students asked to meet with Brodhead following a news conference the previous evening at which he announced the university is suspending future lacrosse games pending a clearer resolution of the legal situation. They had gathered to protest outside the conference. Brodhead spoke with them briefly and, since he needed to leave, arranged to return the following morning for a longer conversation. Many of the students spent much of the night preparing for the morning's meeting at the Mary Lou Williams Center in the West Union building. A group called Concerned Citizens at Duke University distributed a statement at the meeting voicing the sentiments of some in attendance, saying "the university is cultivating and sustaining a culture of privilege and silence that allows inappropriate behavior to plague the campus." In response, Brodhead reiterated his unwillingness to pass judgment about the criminal allegations until more facts emerge from the police investigation, saying the university would respond appropriately. The players deny the criminal allegations and no charges have been filed. "If you were at a university where the president meted out punishment based on what he reads in the newspaper, it would be a pretty dangerous place," Brodhead said. However, he applauded the students for using the incident as an opportunity to address broader issues that need attention and sought their assistance in sparking discussion more widely across the campus. "We have to trust the process of education," he said, urging those in attendance to talk with other kinds of people, engaging them as individuals with a capacity for growth. "We are not a perfect community," he said, "but we are a community where we take these issues seriously." Brodhead also responded to a number of specific suggestions, such as for strengthening Duke's ties with North Carolina Central University and enhancing the training athletes receive on issues such as diversity and sexual violence. Describing the meeting participants as "most impressive," Brodhead said he looked forward to similar conversations with other students and members of the Duke and Durham communities. Many of the participants lingered after the meeting to discuss the issues, plan future actions and speak with reporters who had assembled outside the room.



Durham, N.C. - Yesterday evening, Director of Athletics Joe Alleva and I met with members of the news media to discuss the situation involving the Duke men's lacrosse team. My statement announcing the suspension of the team's games is available with additional information on a special website off the Duke home page. At the news conference I was asked about the 911 tape involving a racial slur, which only became known late yesterday. I have now had the opportunity to listen to the tape. It is disgusting. Racism and its hateful language have no place in this community. I am sorry the woman and her friend were subjected to such abuse.



Durham, N.C. - Dear Duke Alumni, Many of you will have heard by now news accounts about allegations against the Duke lacrosse team, which the captains of the team deny. Yesterday evening, Director of Athletics Joe Alleva and I met with members of the news media to discuss the situation. My statement announcing the suspension of lacrosse games and a supplementary statement amplifying on a question from the press conference are available on a special  website. I invite you to read them so that you will be better informed about what is happening at Duke. It's understandable to feel bad when terrible things may have happened at a place you love, and I've heard from many of you who have expressed sadness, anger, outrage and frustration about the lacrosse situation. Let me also say that as painful as these times are, the test of a school is not preventing bad things from ever happening, but in addressing them in an honest and forthright way. In my meetings with students, faculty, and administrators, I believe Duke is doing just that. I urge you to keep informed of developments by checking the website as the days go by. Sincerely yours, Richard H. Brodhead



Durham, N.C. - Dear Parent of Duke Undergraduate, Many of you will have heard by now news accounts about allegations against members of the Duke lacrosse team, which the captains of the team deny. On Tuesday evening, Director of Athletics Joe Alleva and I met with members of the news media to discuss the situation. My statement announcing the suspension of lacrosse games and a supplementary statement amplifying on a question from the press conference are available with other material on a special website. This is a difficult time at Duke. Allegations have been made that, if verified, will justify all of our outrage and call for very severe penalties. On the other hand, we need to remember that allegation is not the same thing as conviction, and that we must not prejudge until the facts are established. The Durham police will have our full cooperation in expediting their investigation. I would gladly have spared your sons and daughters this experience. But painful as these days are, times of strain can also be times of education. We will be working as always to assure the welfare of our students, and we'll be struggling to make this an occasion where we can all grow in wisdom. I urge you to keep informed of developments by checking the website as the days go by. Sincerely yours, Richard H. Brodhead



Durham, N.C. - Duke University officials alerted students Friday to a rumor of a planned "drive-by shooting" of a house near Duke's East Campus but emphasized there was no reliable information to support the rumor. The rumor reportedly resulted from a man who said in a Durham magistrate's office that he planned to shoot at the house on N. Buchanan Boulevard, where members of the Duke men's lacrosse team held a March 13 party where a sexual attack allegedly occurred. Team members have denied the criminal allegations and no charges have been filed. Durham Police officials reportedly responded to the rumor by alerting Duke students who live near the house. They said the incident is unrelated to two gang-related, retaliatory shootings earlier Friday in Walltown, several blocks from East Campus. Durham Police are investigating the shootings. Duke and Durham Police have substantially increased patrol coverage of the area including Trinity Park, Ninth Street and East Campus. They said the coverage will remain in place for as long as necessary. Shortly before 10 p.m., Duke Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta shared the information in an email message that he sent "with great discomfort," saying "I neither want to create any sense of hysteria for the Duke and Trinity Park communities nor withhold the existence of this information." The text of Moneta's message follows below. Updates or related information, if needed, will be provided on Duke's police news website, http://www.dukenews.duke.edu/police.html. **** Dear students, I write to inform you of a rumor I've just learned. I don't have a way of validating the credibility of the rumor as it came to us third hand from the Durham Police to various members of the Duke community. What we've heard is threats of "drive by shooting" of the lacrosse house in the Trinity Park area. As of the time I write this (approximately 9pm), we are aware of a gang-related shooting that took place this afternoon on Sedgefield Street in Walltown (several blocks from Trinity Park). We are assured by Durham Police that this is not related to Duke in any way. We also have a report that passengers in a car yelled at Duke students in houses on Buchanan Street. I share this information with great discomfort. I neither want to create any sense of hysteria for the Duke and Trinity Park communities nor withhold the existence of this information. We've spoken with several of the students who live in those houses and many have chosen to stay elsewhere tonight. Duke and Durham Police have substantially increased patrol coverage of the area including Trinity Park, Ninth Street and East Campus. That coverage will remain in place for as long as necessary. I would suggest that until we have information to discredit or validate this rumor, we all take appropriate precautions. Unfortunately, tensions are very high right now and may not abate for awhile. I would anticipate further rumors and conflicting information and we'll do our very best to keep you informed. Most important will be to care for each other as we all struggle with these challenges. We have work to do to restore confidence in our community and I have absolute belief that we can and will. Please contact Duke Police *anytime* if you feel threatened or have information related to any unsafe situations. Call 911 or 684-2444 for immediate support. Larry Moneta Vice President for Student Affairs  



Durham, N.C. - President Richard H. Brodhead reached out to groups on campus and beyond Thursday, responding to concerns about the situation involving the men's lacrosse team. "It's understandable to feel badly when terrible things may have happened at a place you love, and I've heard from many of you who have expressed sadness, anger, outrage and frustration about the lacrosse situation," Brodhead wrote in an e-mail message to alumni. "Let me also say that as painful as these times are, the test of a school is not preventing bad things from ever happening, but in addressing them in an honest and forthright way. In my meetings with students, faculty, and administrators, I believe Duke is doing just that." In a similar message to parents, Brodhead said he would "gladly have spared your sons and daughters this experience. But painful as these days are, times of strain can also be times of education. We will be working as always to assure the welfare of our students, and we'll be struggling to make this an occasion where we can all grow in wisdom." Team members have been accused of sexually assaulting a woman at a March 13 off-campus party. They have denied the criminal allegations, which Durham police are investigating. No charges have been filed. Brodhead began the day at a private meeting with Durham Mayor William Bell, North Carolina Central University Chancellor James Ammons, local ministers and leaders of the Durham Committee on Black People. After the meeting, Ammons told the Durham Herald-Sun, "I thought that it was a very good beginning to, first of all, share our feeling about the seriousness of these allegations and our stand against sexual violence against women, racial discrimination and racial hate, and to share our concern about the young lady who was obviously traumatized by these alleged acts and to find a way to be respectful of the legal process, to let it play out and not rush to judgment." Later in the day, Brodhead met with members of the Trinity College Board of Advisers. In the afternoon, he spoke at a well-attended, occasionally contentious faculty meeting, once again addressing both the specific incident and broader issues such as Duke's relations with the community. The faculty meeting was held in executive session and was closed to non-faculty members. Duke's president was not alone in discussing the situation, which has become a focus of intense discussion across campus and beyond. Television trucks once again lined up along the West Quad, with reporters interviewing students and others for stories that have filled the airwaves and the front pages of major newspapers. A Google search Thursday evening produced more than 1,000 stories on the situation, from sources ranging from the New York Times to Sports Illustrated. A sample of recent media coverage, along with materials that include Brodhead's letters to alumni and parents, is available on the website Duke has created about the situation.



Durham, N.C. - As representative of the Duke Student body, we as members of the Duke Student Government want to express both our dismay and disgust at any and all acts of sexual misconduct and violence committed by members of the student body. As members of the Duke and Durham community, we all shoulder the responsibility for promoting mutual respect and honesty. The decision of any student to commit an act of sexual or other violence toward another human is deplorable, and should not be tolerated. Any student found guilty of committing or concealing such a crime should be submitted to the proper university sanctions and consequences in addition to all legal penalties. Although the alleged acts of racial and misogynistic intolerance may not constitute criminal acts, these too must be considered violations of the Duke Community Standard. Furthermore, any student found to be in breach of the Duke Community Standard by withholding pertinent information should be immediately sanctioned by the judicial board. However, until such proof of a crime or a breach of the Duke Community Standard can be established through fair and judicious means, it is important to afford all students the same respect that is demanded of them, and remember that in our system of law everyone is innocent until proven guilty. As Sexual Assault Prevention Week continues, we encourage students to take advantage of the events. Last night's Take Back the Night Rally and Speakout were very successful. Look out for tables on the Main Quad for more events this week. The office of Sexual Assault Support Services is available for any student seeking confidential crisis response, advocacy, referrals and counseling. The office is housed in the Duke Women's Center, open 8:30am -- 5pm M-F, and can be reached at 684-3897. The after hours info line is 681-6882. You can also visit their website for further information, http://wc.studentaffairs.duke.edu (click on the SASS section). Additionally, CAPS provides counseling and psychological services for Duke students. That office can be reached at 660-1000. For a local 24-hr crisis line you can call the DurhamCrisisResponseCenter at 402-6562. There are many ways to get involved on campus. The Sexual Harassment and Rape Prevention (SHARP) peer educators promote awareness and education of the issue around campus. For information on joining, see http://healtydevil.studentaffairs.duke.edu Men Acting for Change (MAC) is a group directed at men's roles in creating a safe and healthy environment committed to ending gender-related violence. For more information, visit www.duke.edu/web/mac There are also volunteer opportunities available with the office of Sexual Assault Support Services. Please contact their office for more details at 684-3897. Respectfully Submitted, Brandon J. Goodwin, Executive Vice President Logan Leinster, VP of Community Interaction Paige Sparkman, VP of Student Affairs Jesse Longoria, President Brenda Bautsch, VP of Athletics & Campus Services Joe Fore, VP of Academic Affairs Russ Ferguson, Chief of Staff SENATORS Craig Bohn Jeff Buchan Jamie Campbell Genevieve Cody Kendall Dabaghi Jeff Federspiel George Fleming Atin Garg Jordan Giordano Kathleen Greene Jason Gross Daron Gunn Mark Jelley Lee Kornfeld Wei Li Jeremy Marshall Maggie McGannon Duncan McKenna Matt McNeill Chauncey Nartey Emily Pontzer Elise Schmidt Josh Solera Ryan Strasser Jeff Vaughn




Editor's Note:  The Executive Committee of the Academic Council is the administrative committee of the university's faculty council. 
Durham, N.C. - Executive Committee of the Academic Council April 5, 2006 On Thursday, March 30th, an extraordinary executive session of the Academic Council was called, with the fullest support and participation of President Brodhead, to enable communication and consultation between the faculty and the president about the events now rocking our community. Sitting faculty representatives on the current Council as well as all incoming representatives were convened, and all interested Duke faculty were invited to attend. The following statement is based on the Executive Committee of the Academic Council's best overall sense of that meeting, and it is ECAC's attempt to convey some of the intensity and cogency of faculty responses -- not only to events unfolding around the March 13/14th episode involving members of the lacrosse team, but also to the host of related concerns about the undergraduate experience at our school that this episode has made especially and painfully evident. There are two distinct but related aspects of the situation we now face: The first aspect narrowly concerns the conduct and resulting charges surrounding the lacrosse team incident of March 13/14th. We specifically expect members of the lacrosse team to cooperate fully with the investigation insofar as their Constitutional rights against self-incrimination allow. We specifically expect all DukeUniversity officials, whether from the Athletics department, the senior Administration, or anywhere else, to exert themselves to facilitate this investigation. We recognize clearly that the legal process relating to this incident and any individuals who may be named in it must and should take its own due course; charges of this grave nature belong in the jurisdiction of governmental and not university educational authorities. That said, and aside from any charges ultimately emerging from the prosecutorial investigation, it is the sense of the faculty that we have reached the point where a critical mass of information and witness concerning lacrosse team behavior compels a comprehensive inquiry into the program, its culture, its staff, and its effects on the daily lives of our students and our neighbors. To that end, in constructive collaboration with President Brodhead, a committee chaired by Professor James Coleman of the LawSchool has been appointed. This committee will present its findings and recommendations to President Brodhead and the Academic Council on or before May 1, 2006. The second phenomenon before us is both more broad and more elusive, concerning everyday life on campus: Duke's own share of a web of interconnected issues that we all recognize are at least national in scope. This web is easier to describe than its effects are to remedy. Across college campuses, already volatile issues of race, gender, and class privilege intersect negatively with the powerful social reaches of sports culture and alcohol use on campus. The events of the past weeks have occasioned collective reflection and collective anguish on the part of the Duke faculty. The anguish comes from faculty who already felt too familiar, by experience and by expertise, with the taxing terms and conditions of campus life for many segments of our student body. The anguish came also from faculty for whom this occasion brought forth formerly unknown details of student experience outside the classroom, creating a new sense of both urgency and uncertainty about how best to fulfill the educational mission of our institution in its broadest sense. The problem now in front of us, individually and as a collective body of teachers, presents vast challenges. Not the least of these challenges concerns the formulation of a response that will be both substantive and consequential when relevant structural realities and cultural practices far exceed the reach of any one university. What we need now is to determine which aspects of our local manifestation of the mix of race, gender, sexuality, sport, and alcohol in undergraduate culture can be addressed effectively by the means available to us as an academic community -- not in an attempt to curtail social life on campus, but in order to promote justice, a more respectful social and educational environment, and real conviviality. We will be working in collaboration with President Brodhead, Vice President Larry Moneta in Student Affairs, and others to develop an adequately specific approach to the issues that have been made so starkly apparent in this episode. At the same time, we urge our colleagues to channel the profound concern and knowledge that have been generated here to develop constructive ways, great and small, to engage and support our students beyond the classroom. Regardless of developments in the narrower legal situation, or in a review of the lacrosse program, we as faculty need to develop richer forms of attentiveness to the lives and hopes of our students. Paul Haagen (Law), Chair Julie Edell Britton (Fuqua) Linda Franzoni (Mechanical Engineering) Sally Kornbluth (Pharmacology & Cancer Biology) Elizabeth Livingston (Ob/Gyn) Marjorie McElroy (Economics) Laurie Shannon (English), Vice Chair John Staddon (Psychological & Brain Sciences), Faculty Secretary




Editor's Note:  A statement from Athletics Director Joe Alleva is available at  www.goduke.com.  
Durham, N.C. - The court released today a previously sealed warrant, whose contents are sickening and repulsive. I have canceled the men's lacrosse season and all associated activities, effective immediately. Lacrosse Coach Mike Pressler has submitted his resignation to Athletics Director Joe Alleva, effective immediately. Typically, we are prohibited under federal privacy regulations from releasing information regarding individual student disciplinary matters. In this case, the student named in the warrant has signed a release and given us permission to say that he has received an interim suspension. As a result of the interim suspension, the student is no longer on campus. I once again urge anyone with information pertinent to the events of March 13 to cooperate with the authorities.




Editor's Note: For background information on the men's lacrosse controversy, click here. 
Durham, N.C. - April 5, 2006 A Letter to the Duke Community I want to speak to the issue that is troubling our community and announce five steps we are taking to address it. Allegations against members of the Duke lacrosse team stemming from the party on the evening of March 13 have deeply troubled me and everyone else at this university and our surrounding city. We can't be surprised at the outpouring of outrage. Rape is the substitution of raw power for love, brutality for tenderness, and dehumanization for intimacy. It is also the crudest assertion of inequality, a way to show that the strong are superior to the weak and can rightfully use them as the objects of their pleasure. When reports of racial abuse are added to the mix, the evil is compounded, reviving memories of the systematic racial oppression we had hoped to have left behind us. If the allegations are verified, what happened would be a deep violation of fundamental ethical principles and among the most serious crimes known to the legal system. Such conduct is completely unacceptable both within the university and in our society at large. If the truth of the allegations is upheld, it will call for severe punishment from the courts and from Duke's disciplinary system. This university has cooperated and will continue to cooperate to the fullest to speed the ongoing investigation by the police, and I pledge that Duke will respond with appropriate seriousness when the truth is established. But it is clear that the acts the police are investigating are only part of the problem. This episode has touched off angers, fears, resentments, and suspicions that range far beyond this immediate cause. It has done so because the episode has brought to glaring visibility underlying issues that have been of concern on this campus and in this town for some time—issues that are not unique to Duke or Durham but that have been brought to the fore in our midst. They include concerns of women about sexual coercion and assault. They include concerns about the culture of certain student groups that regularly abuse alcohol and the attitudes these groups promote. They include concerns about the survival of the legacy of racism, the most hateful feature American history has produced. Compounding and intensifying these issues of race and gender, they include concerns about the deep structures of inequality in our society—inequalities of wealth, privilege, and opportunity (including educational opportunity), and the attitudes of superiority those inequalities breed. And they include concerns that, whether they intend to or not, universities like Duke participate in this inequality and supply a home for a culture of privilege. The objection of our East Campus neighbors was a reaction to an attitude of arrogant inconsiderateness that reached its peak in the alleged event but that had long preceded it. I know that to many in our community, this student behavior has seemed to be the face of Duke. Given the history of this campus and city, this has been particularly painful. Only forty years ago, the first African American student was admitted to Duke and at that time men and women lived on separate campuses. Today, more than one-third of Duke undergraduates are members of minority groups. Many, many dedicated members of the Duke and Durham communities have worked hard to bring us all forward. Duke has worked to be a good neighbor, supporting health care, K-12 education, affordable housing, neighborhood stabilization, and economic development through the Duke-Durham Neighborhood Partnership. Duke is not, as some have reported, just an institution for the children of wealthy families. This university admits undergraduates without regard to their family's ability to pay, and we invest more than $50 million a year to enable the 40% of students who receive grant aid to afford a Duke education. Duke's Women's Initiative, launched by my predecessor Nannerl Keohane, took the national lead in exploring issues of gender inequality across the university. Perhaps most important, I know—and I suspect our students' harshest critics know too—that the huge majority of Duke students are well-behaved and good-hearted, and many work hard for the larger social good. But if the dark aspect is not the whole truth, this is not a moment to take comfort or mount defenses. To get the good of the current situation, we all need to face up to the profoundly serious issues that recent events have brought to light and address them in a positive, substantive, and ongoing way. If none of these issues is peculiar to Duke, that's no reason why we should refuse to address them in our midst. As we decide what steps to take, let me underline the values that must govern our actions. The university is guided by the principles of openness, inclusiveness, mutual toleration, and mutual respect. Everything that furthers these causes advances our ability to work together toward the truth no individual or group can reach alone. Everything that hinders these causes retards the search for wisdom and knowledge. The university is also founded on the principle that we have an obligation to seek the truth, and that truth is established through evidence and disciplined inquiry. Reaching certainty without evidence or process is a double wrong in a university because it opens the door to injustice and violates our commitment to the truth. In keeping with these values, I want to announce five steps Duke will take to address the issues before us. Some will be accomplished in a short period of time; others will require our sustained attention. 1. Investigation of men's lacrosse. In regard to men's lacrosse, I have announced today that the men's lacrosse season and all associated activities have been cancelled. Lacrosse coach Mike Pressler submitted his resignation today to Athletics Director Joe Alleva and it was accepted, effective immediately. The criminal allegations against members of the team must continue to be investigated by the Durham police and we will continue to cooperate with that investigation to the fullest. Many have urged me to have Duke conduct its own inquiry into these charges. Frustrating though it is, Duke must defer its own investigation until the police inquiry is completed, first because the police have access to key witnesses, warrants, and information that we lack, and second because our concurrent questioning could create a risk of complications—for instance, charges of witness tampering—that could negatively affect the legal proceedings. I assure you, however, that the Duke disciplinary system will be brought to bear as soon as this can appropriately be done. Until that time, I urge us to be patient and remind ourselves that allegations have been made, the team has denied them, and we must wait until the authorities act before reaching any judgment in the criminal case. Quite separate from the criminal allegations, there have been reports of persistent problems involving the men's lacrosse team, including racist language and a pattern of alcohol abuse and disorderly behavior. These are quite separate from the criminal allegations, and these we will address at once. The Athletic Council, the body with oversight of athletics in Duke's governance system, is the right group to perform this investigation. The Executive Committee of the Academic Council and I have asked a faculty subcommittee of the Athletic Council to investigate all the evidence regarding objectionable behavior prior to March 13. The intention here is not to single out the behavior of individuals but to understand the extent to which the cumulative behavior of many over a number of years signifies a deeper problem for which significant corrective actions are called for. I have asked this group to report its findings and to make any recommendations it may have by May 1. I am pleased that Professor James Coleman of the DukeLawSchool, an Athletic Council member, has agreed to chair this committee. 2. Investigation of Duke Administration Response. I have heard a good deal of criticism of the Duke administration for being slow to respond to the allegations against the team associated with March 13. At meetings with faculty, students, community members, and others, I have explained why it took time to know how to respond: we learned the full magnitude of the allegations only gradually, as police and other information was reported in the media, and indeed it appears it took the police themselves some time to understand the nature of the case. Nevertheless, I want to address the concern that my administration did not respond as quickly as we should have and to learn any lessons this episode can teach. To that end, I have asked two individuals with outstanding experience in higher education and civil rights to look into the role of the Duke administration and Duke Athletics in handling this episode. I am grateful to William Bowen, President of the Andrew Mellon Foundation and former President of Princeton University, and Julius Chambers, former Director-Counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund and past Chancellor of North Carolina Central University, for agreeing to take on this task. They have agreed to report their findings and make any recommendations to me by May 15. 3. Examination of student judicial process and practices. Questions have been raised within the Duke and Durham communities about the way Duke deals with problems of student behavior and the applicability of our Community Standard to social life. The Executive Committee of the Academic Council has charged the Council's Student Affairs Committee, chaired by Professor Prasad Kasibhatla, to study Duke's existing judicial processes and practices for students and make any recommendations for change to the administration and faculty by June 1. 4. Campus Culture Initiative. Duke traditionally has given its students a great deal of freedom, but at times the exercise of that freedom is not matched with a commensurate sense of responsibility. We must be concerned about issues of campus culture this episode has raised quite apart from the lacrosse team. This is a time for Duke to take a hard look at our institutional practices to assess the extent to which they do, or do not, promote the values we expect students to live by. I have asked Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta and Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education and Dean of Trinity College Robert Thompson to direct a Campus Culture Initiative involving faculty, students, and staff. The task of the Initiative is to evaluate and suggest improvements in the ways Duke educates students in the values of personal responsibility, consideration for others, and mutual respect in the face of difference and disagreement. The goal of this initiative is not to tell students "what to think" in some simplistic or doctrinaire way. Nevertheless, this is our chance to take the ethical dimension of education much more seriously than heretofore. An important task of the Initiative will be to enlist the faculty more fully in this broader work of education. Since we need to engage the whole of the student population in this process, we will also need to involve all of Duke's overlapping student groups and communities and learn how they can be parts of the solution. Although the academic year will soon draw to a close, I believe the Initiative's work should begin this spring. We should not lose the chance for education in large and small groups supplied by this moment of heightened sensitivity. Some work can be done over the coming summer, and we are looking to pioneer a period of focused engagement on campus issues for upper class students in the fall. In honesty, some of the Initiative's work will require long-lasting attention and is unsusceptible to any quick fix. This would include promoting a more responsible approach to the culture of campus drinking, a major factor in Duke's recent crisis and the source of much bad college conduct throughout the United States. I have asked Vice Provost Thompson to report on the Initiative's progress at the end of this term and again in the fall. 5. Presidential Council In addition to these steps aimed at the lacrosse team culture and our larger student culture, I will convene a presidential council to give advice and offer guidance to me and the Board of Trustees. This group will be made up of wise figures from within the university community, from the larger Duke family, from the national higher education community, and from the city of Durham. I will ask it to receive and critique our internal policies and self-assessments regarding the promotion of these central values; to inform our on-campus efforts with the best practices in other university settings; and to consider ways that Duke and its community can work yet more closely to promote these values in a larger social setting. Emeriti Trustees Wilhelmina Reuben-Cooke, Provost and Vice President of Academic Affairs of the University of the District of Columbia, and Roy Bostock, Chairman of The Partnership for a Drug-Free America, have agreed to chair and I plan to convene the first meeting of the Council this spring. In addition to these five steps, I look forward to continuing a dialogue with leaders in Durham and at North Carolina Central University. I'm indebted to Mayor Bill Bell for hosting a meeting on the Duke campus last week that brought together many African American leaders to discuss the incident of March 13. We concluded that meeting with the resolve to meet again; I look forward to further discussions with this group and others at the next meeting, which my colleague NCCU Chancellor James Ammons has offered to host. Durham is a proud city with a rich history and a diverse population that responds to the challenges of the day better than many other cities in this country. I'm resolved to seize the moment to do what I can to strengthen what is in many aspects, but surely not all, a positive relationship between our university and city. Nobody wishes trouble on one's house and I regret the trouble that this incident has brought to Duke and Durham. But when trouble arrives, it's the test of a community and its leaders to deal with it honestly, act accordingly and learn from it. This is a deeply emotional time as well as a rare opportunity for education – for our students, faculty, administrators, and members of our community. Let's move forward with a serious commitment to make progress on the many complex issues that confront us now. Richard H. Brodhead President Duke University




Editor's Note: A copy of President Brodhead's letter to the Duke community is available here. Information about the committees and presidential council can be found here. A special website with background information on the lacrosse situation can be found here. 
Durham, N.C. - Saying he is "deeply troubled" by the sexual assault allegations against members of the Duke University men's lacrosse team, President Richard H. Brodhead sent a letter to the Duke community late Wednesday outlining five specific actions he is taking to address issues raised in the community and on campus by the March 13 incident. Earlier in the day, Brodhead announced that the remainder of men's lacrosse season has been canceled, and Athletics Director Joe Alleva announced that the team's coach, Mike Pressler, has resigned, effective immediately. In addition, one of the members of the lacrosse team has been given an interim suspension from the university pending a formal student judicial hearing. In an interview, Brodhead said, "In listening to community leaders, faculty members students and alumni, it is clear that this episode has touched off angers, fears, resentments, and suspicions that range far beyond this immediate cause. It has done so because the episode has brought to glaring visibility underlying issues that have been of concern on this campus and in this town for some time." In his letter, Brodhead said he has asked separate committees to examine and to report back to him quickly on a range of concerns, including: -- examining the culture of the lacrosse team; -- investigating the Duke administration's response to the sexual assault allegations; -- examining the student judicial process and disciplinary procedures; -- launching a Campus Culture Initiative, a rigorous self-examination "to evaluate and suggest improvements in the ways Duke educates students in the values of personal responsibility." -- creating a presidential council, made up of people from the Durham community, national higher education circles and Duke, that will scrutinize Duke's responses to the lacrosse team incident and advise the president on whether the responses are appropriate and effective. In his letter, Brodhead explained the reasons for his actions. "To get the good of the current situation, we all need to face up to the profoundly serious issues that recent events have brought to light and address them in a positive, substantive and ongoing way," he wrote. Duke law professor James E. Coleman Jr. will lead Duke's examination of the on- and off-campus conduct of its men's lacrosse team. The committee will not be looking into any of the recent criminal allegations against the team. "We do not want to interfere with the criminal investigation in any way," Coleman said. "The question is whether the members of the team engage in behavior that is inconsistent with what is expected of a Duke student; whether this is something that has been ongoing, whether the university has been aware of it, whether the teams -- the coaches and Athletic Department -- have been aware of it; and whether the university, coaches and Athletic Department have taken appropriate action to deal with it," Coleman said. "We will begin by reviewing all available records -- disciplinary records, and complaints made to the Duke and Durham police -- and we'll look at the various procedures in place for monitoring the conduct of students in general, and athletes in particular, to determine the adequacy of those," Coleman said. While the focus is on the lacrosse team, the committee will look into reports of misconduct by other relevant student groups to see if the lacrosse players' conduct "stands out," Coleman said. The committee's report to Brodhead is due May 1. Other actions noted by Brodhead in his letter include: -- an investigation of the Duke administration's performance in responding to the allegations. The investigation will be conducted by William Bowen, president of the Andrew Mellon Foundation and former president of Princeton University, and Julius Chambers, former director-counsel of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund and past chancellor of North Carolina Central University. Brodhead explained in his letter: "I have heard a good deal of criticism of the Duke administration for being slow to respond to the allegations against the team associated with March 13. At meetings with faculty, students, community members, and others, I have explained why it took time to know how to respond: we learned the full magnitude of the allegations only gradually, as police and other information was reported in the media, and indeed it appears it took the police themselves some time to understand the nature of the case. "I am grateful that two of the nation's most respected leaders whose knowledge of higher education and reputation for integrity are unsurpassed have agreed to undertake this assignment." Their findings and any recommendations will be given to Brodhead by May 15. -- an examination of how Duke deals with problems of student behavior. The Academic Council's Student Affairs Committee, headed by environmental professor Prasad Kasibhatla, will study the student judicial process and disciplinary procedures and make any recommendations for change to the administration and faculty by June 1, said Academic Council chair and law professor Paul Haagen. Haagen said the committee will look at several questions, including, "Does the Community Standard and the policies which apply to student behavior adequately convey Duke's values and behavioral expectations?"; "Are the distinctions between on-campus and off-campus behaviors, and Duke's approach to adjudication of those behaviors, appropriate?"; and "Are there limitations in the policies which prevent various behaviors from being addressed appropriately and effectively?" "I am determined to have a disciplined approach to dealing with these questions so we don't merely end up acting in regards to this one issue, but end up with good, sustainable and appropriate solutions," Haagen said. -- the launching of a Campus Culture Initiative, a rigorous self-examination "to evaluate and suggest improvements in the ways Duke educates students in the values of personal responsibility, consideration for others, and mutual respect in the face of difference and disagreement." The initiative will be headed by Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta and Robert Thompson, vice provost for undergraduate education and dean of Trinity College. "In honesty, some of the initiative's work will require long-lasting attention and is unsusceptible to any quick fix," Brodhead wrote. "This would include promoting a more responsible approach to the culture of campus drinking, a major factor in Duke's recent crisis and the source of much bad college conduct throughout the United States." Work on the initiative is expected to begin this spring; in the fall discussions will be held with returning students about Duke's social climate. -- the appointment of a widely representative presidential council to critique Duke's responses to the issues raised by the March incident. Answering the question "How can we have confidence that Duke is seriously addressing these issues?" will be one of the primary missions of the council, Brodhead said in the letter. "I will ask [the council] to receive and critique our internal self-assessments regarding the promotion of these central values; to inform our on-campus efforts with the best practices in other university settings; and to consider ways that Duke and its community can work yet more closely to promote these values in a larger social setting," Brodhead wrote. That council will be headed by Roy Bostock, a former Duke trustee and director of the Duke University Health System who is now chairman of the Partnership for a Drug-Free America, and Wilhelmina Reuben-Cooke, a Duke alumna and former Duke trustee who is currently Provost/Vice President Academic Affairs at the University of the District of Columbia. The council is set to hold its first meeting this spring and will report back to Brodhead and the university's Board of Trustees. In his letter, Brodhead spoke about why this incident has proven to be so painful to him, the campus and the community. He said "the huge majority of Duke students are well-behaved and good-hearted, and many work hard for the larger social good." He also vowed to continue working with Duke's neighbors, area leaders, students, faculty and others to address the issues raised in this incident in a "positive, substantive and ongoing way."




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Robert Steel is the chairman of the Duke University Board of Trustees 
Durham, N.C. - The trustees of Duke University have been in active conversation with President Brodhead and the university's senior leadership since the outset of the controversy involving the men's lacrosse team. We appreciate the constancy of President Brodhead's responsible leadership at a time when the facts are not clear and emotions run high. President Brodhead has spoken eloquently about the challenges our community faces and the values that must guide us in doing so, in addressing the serious issues that have surfaced as a result of this incident. First and foremost, we await a resolution of the facts surrounding the party of March 13, and join in calling for full cooperation with the police investigation. As President Brodhead has consistently stated, the crimes alleged are grave and, if verified, will warrant severe punishment from both the criminal justice system and Duke's student judicial process. Simultaneously, we must protect the rights of students who have maintained their innocence and not been charged with any crime. As President Brodhead has noted, we need not -- and will not -- wait on the resolution of this case to address broader issues that range from the social culture of our students to difficult questions involving race, class and Duke's relationships with its Durham neighbors. We endorse the steps President Brodhead is taking to deal with both the immediate situation and these wider challenges. The trustees recognize and deeply regret how the current situation has cast a cloud over the many wonderful people who comprise our campus and the larger community of Durham. We are especially grateful to Mayor Bill Bell and Chancellor James Ammons and many others in the Durham community and at Duke for their wise and statesmanlike leadership during this troubled time. When all of the facts are in, Duke will be judged by how it responded to the challenges before us. The trustees recognize these challenges and pledge our personal and collective support over the coming weeks to ensure that Duke University responds in a manner consistent with the great institution we know it to be.




Editor's Note:  Aaron Graves is the associate vice president for campus safety and security at Duke University.  
Durham, N.C. - "Two Durham police detectives visited a residence hall on the Duke University campus yesterday evening. They were there as part of the ongoing police investigation of the March 13 incident on North Buchanan Boulevard, and they notified the Duke Police Department ahead of time. No search warrants were executed. The purpose of the visit was to conduct interviews. We do not know who they interviewed during the hour and 15 minutes they were in the Edens Residence Hall. "Duke reiterates its earlier statements that it is cooperating fully with the police investigation and urges anyone with information pertinent to the events of March 13 to cooperate with the authorities. Any further questions about this should be directed to the Durham Police Department."




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: John F. Burness is the senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke University. 
Durham, N.C. - "We are aware that the district attorney made a presentation to the grand jury today, but we have no knowledge about the contents of his presentation, and no information about the grand jury's deliberations has been released. At this point we remain unclear about the precise status of this case and we must simply wait for news of today's proceedings. Until we have greater clarity it would be inappropriate to comment further."




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Larry Moneta is vice president for student affairs at Duke University. 
Durham, N.C. - Two Duke University students have been indicted by a grand jury investigating allegations of sexual assault against a Durham woman. The university is prohibited under federal privacy regulations from releasing information regarding student disciplinary matters. (For more information about the Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act -- FERPA -- see http://www.ed.gov/policy/gen/guid/fpco/ferpa/index.html.) Historically, it has been the university's practice to issue an interim suspension when a student is charged with a felony or when the student's presence on the campus may create an unsafe situation.




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: Richard H. Brodhead is president of Duke University 
Durham, N.C. -  For the past month, Durham and the nation have followed the allegations of a serious crime involving members of the Duke men's lacrosse team. The emerging story has taken new twists and turns virtually every day. In this situation of inflamed passions and painful uncertainty, I have emphasized the importance of not rushing to judgment and allowing the legal system to establish the truth. I'm grateful that other Durham leaders, notably Mayor Bell and North Carolina Central Chancellor Ammons, have urged patience as well. Today the case has taken a new turn: the grand jury handed down indictments against two students who have since been arrested. District Attorney Nifong will now have an opportunity to present his case, and we will learn on what basis he has pressed his charges. We also move from unfocused speculation about 46 members of the team to the court of law where the guilt or innocence of the individuals charged will be established. It is worth reminding ourselves that in our system of laws, a person is presumed innocent until proven guilty. Many lives have been touched by this case. It has brought pain and suffering to all involved, and it deeply challenges our ability to balance judgment with compassion. As the legal process unfolds, we must hope that it brings a speedy resolution and that the truth of the events is fully clarified. In the meantime, we have important work to do. The Duke and Durham communities must restore the bonds this episode has strained and learn whatever lessons it affords. Building upon the progress that has been made over the past decades, we must work to create a community that assures respect and dignity for all.




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: The chairs will not be publicly commenting on the committee's work until the report is released. 
Durham, N.C. - Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead on Thursday announced the membership of the Campus Cultural Initiative Steering Committee, one of five groups currently exploring issues that arose in the aftermath of the men's lacrosse situation. The committee consists of 24 faculty, students, staff members and alumni. Robert Thompson, vice provost for undergraduate education and dean of Trinity College, will serve as chair; Larry Moneta, vice president for student affairs, will serve as vice-chair. Brodhead charged the committee to conduct a rigorous self-examination "to take the measure of our campus culture and see where it could be improved." The committee is expected to: -- Write a statement of the values and behaviors that should guide Duke students in their relations with others; -- Evaluate and suggest improvements in the ways students develop personal responsibility, social responsibility and civic engagement; -- Assess how students relate to each other and other members of the campus and community across bounds of race, gender and other social divisions; -- Assess the extent to which Duke institutional practices promote values and behaviors expected of students; -- Assess the role that faculty play in the development of student values and behavior and make recommendations for increasing interaction between students and faculty in campus life; and -- Recommend initiatives to promote a more responsible approach to the culture of campus drinking. The committee is expected to issue a preliminary report to Brodhead by the end of December, with a follow-up report due May 1, 2007. In addition to Thompson and Moneta, the membership of the committee is as follows: Faculty: Anne Allison, chair and professor, Department of Cultural Anthropology; Philip Cook, professor, Sanford Institute of Public Policy; Robert Cook-Deegan, director, IGSPCenter for Genome Ethics, Law and Policy; Jeffrey Forbes, assistant professor of the practice, Department of Computer Science; Karla Holloway, professor, Department of English; Elizabeth Kiss, director, Kenan Institute for Ethics; Marie Lynn Miranda, associate research professor, NicholasSchool of the Environment and Earth Sciences; Barry Myers, professor, Department of Biomedical Engineering; Suzanne Shanahan, assistant professor, Department of Sociology; Peter Wood, professor, Department of History. Administrators: Zoila Airall, assistant vice president for student affairs; Steve Nowicki, dean of the natural sciences; Ben Reese, vice president of institutional equity; Jackie Silar, associate athletics director; Sam Wells, dean of the chapel. Students: Lauren Garson ('07); Melissa Mang ('09); Chauncey Nartey ('07); Iman Washington ('07); Elliott Wolf ('08). Alumni: Charlotte Clark, Trinity College '79, MEM '83 (Durham, N.C.); J. Derek Penn, Trinity College '79, B'84 (New York, N.Y.) Comments for the committee may be sent by e-mail to campus-culture@duke.edu.  Background information about all five of the university committees can be found at  www.dukenews.duke.edu/mmedia/features/lacrosse_incident/committees.html.




Editor's Note:  Paul Haagen is professor of law and chair of the Academic Council. The following statement was delivered at the April 20 Academic Council meeting.  
Durham, N.C. - The events and allegations surrounding a men's lacrosse team party on the evening of March 12 - 13 have disrupted our community in profound ways. We have experienced an unwonted intensity of media coverage. Some of this coverage reflects little more than a news cycle driven by sensationalism and prurience. But the intensity of interest in this story is driven by much more than that. It is driven by broader national social concerns about education, individual and institutional responsibility, race, gender and inequality in 21st century America. None of these issues is peculiar to Duke or Durham. Both Duke and Durham are probably far ahead of most of the rest of the United States in our mutual attempts to deal with them. But the focus is now on Duke and Durham and we have both the responsibility and opportunity to address them here. It is a measure of the character of this place, and of the leadership of this University, how Duke has responded to date. It has been a response that has been both open and remarkably without defensiveness. It has been one of adherence to existing procedures and of a refusal to jump to conclusions in the face of uncertainty. Since I am by training a lawyer and by heritage a product of New England and the radical Protestant Reformation, both the insistence on following procedure and the willingness to engage in introspection may come more naturally to me than to others. But recognizing my biases, I believe that Duke's approach will in the end serve us well. Before we get to the end, there will be some pain and more frustration. We can take comfort that our approach is in keeping with the finest traditions of a great academic institution. It is a response that reflects the character of this place and which we should celebrate. This celebration need not be uncritical. This would not be a university if it were. But to fail to recognize how well Duke has dealt with this incident in the face of intense pressure and great uncertainty would be a serious mistake. Communicating this message is remarkably difficult, in part because it is a complicated message that is being delivered to diverse audiences. I am reminded of the frustration of my friend and former colleague, the late Jerome Culp, who had just come back from delivering a public address at East Carolina University on race in America. His message that day was a challenge delivered in two parts. To the African Americans in the audience, he urged that they take greater responsibility for the problems in the African American community and take positive steps to address them. To the whites in the audience, he pointed out the need to come to grips with the legacy and damage of racism, and responsibility of the white community for addressing it. To his dismay, each group warmly endorsed the message intended for the other, and both believed themselves absolved of responsibility until the other put its house in order. It is my hope that we as community, and particularly as a faculty, will concentrate on the work that we need to do, that we will resist that impulse to find in others the source of our and their problems, and that, in the midst of our present turmoil, we will recognize how great a university this is or how much greater it can be.



Durham, N.C. - Following his "State of the University" address Saturday in Page Auditorium, President Richard H. Brodhead responded with the following answer to a question about how Duke has been portrayed in news media coverage of the incident involving the men's lacrosse team. His remarks received a standing ovation: I am very happy to have that question, and I am very happy to have it be the question to conclude. The other questions were fun, but we all have this question in our minds. If you haven't enjoyed the media, imagine how I feel. All I want to tell you about this is that one of the really, really disturbing things about this episode has been to discover that the media -- including the most respected forms of the media -- if you go back to the early stories, they are all written in the key of hysteria, they are all written to inspire hysteria, and they teach the lesson that hysteria breeds extraordinary mental simplifications: Every student at Duke was filthy rich, right? At a school where more than 40 percent of the students are on financial aid, and the average grant from the university is $25,000 of financial aid. Every student at Duke is a white preppy, right? And every person in Durham is a penniless black person. You know, there are such people at Duke, and there are such people in Durham -- and it's important to remember it -- but the truth is it just teaches you that in the world of passion is the world where people just reach for any old stereotype. I've been very troubled by this, of course, and I'll just tell you one thing, I have had so many conversations in the last month, but the one that I think touched me most profoundly was the head of the NAACP in this state, who came to my office and who said to me, "If you ever want someone to come and stand by you and talk about the damage that can be done by prejudging, by judging people because of a group they belong to and some theory you have of that group rather than actual evidence, you come to me," he said. And actually there has been so much prejudgment in this case. It has been a powerful lesson in how deep the passions of prejudice run, all kinds of prejudice -- prejudices against athletes, prejudices against the South have been very, very visible in the Northern media all through this. Now you know one of the troubles is, we can't go back to all these networks afterward and say, "Now that that blew over, would you care to give us the same amount of air time to tell the truth about this story?" That is not the way the media work. Nevertheless, we have to make it our business on absolutely every occasion and every audience we find, I think some of the most effective spokesmen, you notice the stories are getting more complicated nationally, right? And actually more of the truth is getting into the picture. Durham was referred to as a middle-class town in The New York Times the other day; this is astonishing progress. Well, the fact that anybody at Duke is on financial aid has now been mentioned more than once. It takes time. My theory is over time the truth comes back, the passion departs, the full picture comes in. But I want to say something to you guys. Nothing has pained me more about this episode than the notion that people don't want to say where they went to college, because that name is now a source of embarrassment. If you are ever in a situation where you find yourself in that light, you've just got to turn that around. You've got to walk up and say some true thing about this place that is a source of pride and, Lord knows, there are many. And you know what? At the end of the day, this place will be known as it is. It will be known for what it is. And I hope this will be a better place after this episode. But it won't be an altogether different place. It will be known for the excellence that characterizes us now. And that's all of our work, to bring that day about. Thanks.




Editor's Note:  John F. Burness is the senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke  
Durham, N.C. - Duke University is aware from reports in the news media that the New Black Panther Party plans to hold a demonstration at an entrance to the university's West Campus on Monday morning, May 1. While the university has no intention of limiting anyone's right to free speech, we also cannot let the safety of our campus be jeopardized nor can we allow our students to be disrupted, especially during our final exam period. Officials from the university, the City of Durham, and the Duke and Durham police departments have been in communication about this event and are working closely together to ensure that the rights and safety of all on our campus are not threatened, and that any demonstrations near campus abide by all appropriate state and local laws and university regulations regarding pickets and protests. City officials have informed us that so far this group has not obtained the necessary legal permit to hold such a demonstration. If such a permit is obtained, any access by demonstrators to our campus will be tightly controlled and monitored, and no disruptions of our students will be tolerated.




Editor's Note:  Editor's Note: Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead sent the following email message this evening to the university's students, faculty and staff, as well as to the parents of undergraduates 
As you may know, we learned from reports in the news media last evening that an organization known as the New Black Panther Party had announced that it plans to hold a demonstration at the Chapel Drive entrance to West Campus on Monday morning, May 1. These reports indicated the group intended to enter the campus and that they may be carrying guns. Guns are not permitted on Duke's campus. This afternoon, Duke Police were in contact with representatives of that organization. Duke Police were told that the group plans to hold a press conference/demonstration on Durham city property outside West Campus on Monday at 10 a.m. They informed Duke Police that they have no intention of entering the campus to be disruptive in any way. They also assured us they will not have guns. Durham Police will require that any demonstrations on city property near our campus will abide by all appropriate state and local laws. Exams Week begins on Monday. This is a period of considerable stress for our students, especially following the already stressful events of the past several weeks. We will not let the safety of our campus be jeopardized, nor will we allow our students' lives to be disrupted. Duke University will have additional officers assigned. Any attempted access by this group to our campus will be tightly restricted and no disruption of the university will be permitted. This information has been conveyed to the representatives of the New Black Panther Party. Again, they have assured Duke Police that they plan to peacefully assemble off of our campus and do not intend to enter university property. Duke has gone through a difficult period. I am proud of the way this campus community has responded to the many tensions and pressures we have been facing. I wish our students well on their exams. All university activities will go on as scheduled on Monday. Duke Police is taking all necessary precautions to ensure that this is the case.




Editor's Note:  Richard H. Brodhead is president of Duke University. For background information about the lacrosse situation, click  here.  
Durham, N.C. - In my April 5 letter to the Duke community, I outlined a series of steps the university would take in response to the controversy raised by the men's lacrosse team party of March 13. Today I received reports from two of the five committees I announced. We have posted both of these reports on the special  website for announcements related to the lacrosse situation. The first committee, composed of faculty who are current or past members of the University's Athletic Council, was asked to investigate the behavior of the men's lacrosse team prior to March 13. They were not asked to investigate any of the events related to the criminal allegation, which is properly the responsibility of the Durham Police and the District Attorney. The committee's task was to study the conduct of the men's lacrosse team over the past several years to determine whether the team had a history of "outlier" behavior and whether conduct violations had been addressed in appropriate ways. This committee was chaired by Professor James Coleman of the Duke Law School. The second committee, consisting of faculty, students, and administrators from the Academic Council's Student Affairs Committee, was asked to look at the way Duke deals with problems of student behavior and the applicability of our Community Standard to social life. This committee was chaired by Professor  Prasad Kasibhatla of the Nicholas School of the Environment and Earth Sciences. I encourage you to read these reports, and I am indebted to all who labored to produce them. We now have something we have lacked to date, namely, careful, evidence-based inquiries into student behavior and institutional process. I look forward to discussing the reports with members of the Academic Council and others in the days and weeks ahead. In the meantime, I would offer a few initial observations. First, concerning the men's lacrosse team.  The Coleman committee's report tells of a close-knit team that did well academically and excelled athletically but that was irresponsible in its repeated abuse of alcohol. The committee did not, however, find a pattern of racist behavior or sexual abuse. The picture that emerges is complex, with players praised as respectful to employees who worked near the team, and criticized for their inability to learn from multiple citations for inappropriate behavior. The Coleman committee's report will give us useful information as we consider the future of men's lacrosse at Duke in the weeks ahead. In addition, we will begin immediately to improve communication between Student Affairs and the coaches in the area of disciplinary infractions and will clarify a code of conduct for Duke athletes so that it better reflects the role they play in representing the institution. The  committee investigating Duke's judicial system concluded that the policies and practices governing on-campus and off-campus student behavior are different in ways that require review and refinement. They offer suggestions on how our student judicial system can be made more effective and urge greater involvement by the faculty. They note the recurring theme of irresponsible use of alcohol in many of the issues that come before the student judicial system. They also recommend that we integrate our administration of students' academic and non-academic life. I welcome these findings and recommendations. We will set to work this summer to address the recommendations involving clarification of policies and procedures. The committee's comments on larger issues of student conduct are closely related to the work of the Campus Culture Initiative (CCI), another of the initiatives that I announced on April 5. Accordingly, I will bring the report to the CCI steering committee for its consideration. Common to both reports is concern with the behavioral consequences of student drinking and how the university implements its policy on alcohol. I share these concerns and recognize that much inappropriate behavior by students is alcohol-related. We should have no illusions that it will be easy to address the issue of alcohol abuse, since this is a national issue on college campuses, one that often begins before students come to college. At the same time, the current situation gives Duke both an obligation and an opportunity to address this issue in a serious way. Most of all, we are committed to using this moment to find ways to educate our students about the meaning of the choices they make. In closing, I want to express my gratitude to the committee members and most particularly the committee chairs, James Coleman and Prasad Kasibhatla, for taking on this important civic obligation. This campus community is deeply in their debt. I take pride in being part of a community whose members are willing to step forward in times of stress to do the work that needs doing. Our collective life will be better for their efforts. Richard H. Brodhead President Duke University




Editor's Note: For background information about the lacrosse situation, click here. The Coleman Committee report can be found here. The Kasibhatla Committee report can be found here. To see video of the news conference involving the two committee chairs, click here. 
Durham, N.C. - Members of the Duke University men's lacrosse team are "academically and athletically responsible students" who were not out of control before their party of March 13, but too many have been irresponsible in their use of alcohol and engaged in "repetitive misconduct," a faculty committee that carried out a comprehensive review of the team reported Monday to Duke President Richard H. Brodhead. Another committee, which reviewed Duke's judicial practices for students, said inconsistent enforcement of the university's alcohol policy "severely undermines" its effectiveness. Duke's judicial policies are "quite comprehensive" and "reasonable" for dealing with students facing criminal charges, but students need clearer expectations to guide their behavior outside the classroom and in the community, the committee said. The committees "were not asked to investigate any of the events related to the criminal allegation, which is properly the responsibility of the Durham Police and the District Attorney," Brodhead said. The two committees delivered their reports to Brodhead following nearly a month of intensive study. Brodhead appointed them April 5 as part of a five-part response to allegations that lacrosse team members raped a woman at an off-campus party. All of the players, including two who have been charged criminally, deny the allegations. Emphasizing that the legal system must determine what occurred at the party, Brodhead established the five committees to examine broader issues raised by the incident. In addition to the two committees that delivered their reports Monday, a third committee is expected to report by May 15 whether Duke's administration was slow in responding to the incident. A fourth committee, called the Campus Culture Initiative, will submit by Dec. 1 its preliminary study of "the ways Duke educates students in the values of personal responsibility, consideration for others and mutual respect in the face of difference and disagreement." In addition, a new presidential council will scrutinize Duke's responses to the incident, advise the president on best practices in other university settings and consider ways the university can promote its values. "We now have something we have lacked to date, namely, careful, evidence-based inquiries into student behavior and institutional process," Brodhead said in response to the reports. The first report "will give us useful information as we consider the future of men's lacrosse at Duke in the weeks ahead," and the report on Duke's judicial system offers valuable insights to inform the Campus Culture Initiative. Brodhead said "we will begin immediately to improve communication between Student Affairs and the coaches in the area of disciplinary infractions and will clarify a code of conduct for Duke athletes so that it better reflects the role they play in representing the institution." The full text of his response, along with the two reports and information about the committee members, is available at the website Duke has created about the lacrosse situation. The seven faculty members who investigated the lacrosse team are all current or former members of Duke's Athletic Council, appointed by the executive committee of the university's Academic Council. Their charge was to investigate "the extent to which the cumulative behavior of many over a number of years signifies a deeper problem for which significant corrective actions are called for." "We reviewed the general academic performance of the team, as well as a great deal of related material, and spoke with faculty members, coaches, student affairs officials, women's groups, people in the community and many others. We concluded that these are responsible students academically and athletically but, when they are under the influence of alcohol, a large majority of them are socially irresponsible," said the committee's chair, James E. Coleman Jr. Coleman is a Duke Law School professor who served as chief counsel for the U.S. House of Representatives' Committee on Standards of Official Conduct and previously headed a Duke committee that reviewed drug use by athletes. "We looked closely but found no compelling evidence to support claims that these players are racist or have a record of sexual violence," Coleman said. Paradoxically, the committee said, "a large number of the members of the team have been socially irresponsible when under the influence of alcohol. They have repeatedly violated the law against underage drinking. They have drunk alcohol excessively. They have disturbed their neighbors with loud music and noise, both on-campus and off-campus." Coleman described this repetitive conduct as "deplorable but pretty typical of what you see with other Duke students who abuse alcohol." Such misconduct was most common in the fall and at times such as Spring Break, when students have no academic or athletic obligations. The unusually high level of social cohesion among lacrosse players, which the report describes as a "clannish" or "pack" culture, makes their conduct stand out more, since several players are likely to be involved simultaneously. For instance, lacrosse players have been prominent among those drinking heavily at tailgate parties before football games, although they generally have not misbehaved more than other students in such settings. The committee found that "administrators responsible for the discipline of students were generally aware of the irresponsible conduct of lacrosse players associated with drinking. With the exception of the Office of Judicial Affairs, none of these administrators was especially alarmed by the conduct. Although some administrators claim that they communicated their concerns to Coach [Mike] Pressler, there is no evidence that they adequately did so." Duke's approach to student misconduct has been "informal to the point of being casual. The result is a process that is arbitrary and often ineffective," according to the committee, which says "the University's ability to deal fully with the problem of alcohol is undermined by its own ambivalence toward drinking and the conduct it spawns." The committee recommends that Duke continue the men's lacrosse team with appropriate oversight. It calls for an "explicitly articulated" code of conduct for athletes, who should be held to a higher standard than other students. It also recommends a better system of communication between the student affairs and athletics units, as well as a clearly articulated and enforced university alcohol policy. The second committee reported similar problems among the general student body with alcohol abuse and with maintaining consistently high standards in social settings. The Academic Council's Student Affairs Committee was asked to review Duke's judicial system for dealing with problems of student behavior. The eight-member group was chaired by Prasad Kasibhatla, who also served on the lacrosse team review committee. Kasibhatla, an associate professor of environmental chemistry in Duke's NicholasSchool of the Environment and Earth Sciences, has served on a number of university committees and chairs the steering committee that is updating Duke's strategic plan. The second committee said the Duke Community Standard (DCS) and the policies that flow from it articulate Duke's values and behavioral expectations, but are perceived by students and faculty as applying mainly to academic rather than social situations, and to interactions at Duke rather than in the broader community. It called for "a comprehensive set of programs to educate students about, explicitly model, repeatedly reinforce, and promote internalization of the institutional values articulated in the DCS," which should be broadened to include student behavior beyond Duke's boundaries. The university has been more effective in stating its behavioral expectations for students living on-campus than off-campus, said the committee, which met with faculty, students, judicial affairs officers, athletics staff, city officials and others. Despite "noteworthy steps" that Duke has taken recently to deter off-campus misconduct, the committee called for a new code of conduct and judicial policies to guide students living off-campus, adding that recent law enforcement efforts "have not served as an adequate deterrent to off-campus student misconduct." Alcohol abuse is "the major underlying factor" in student misconduct in all settings, and inconsistent enforcement of the university's alcohol policy "severely undermines its effectiveness," the committee said. It recommended a presidential-level initiative to address this issue, as part of the broader Campus Culture Initiative. The committee also found "little and reluctant faculty engagement in the University judicial process," a situation that symbolizes "the pervasive disconnect between the academic and non-academic spheres of University life." Duke should rethink its administrative structure to "integrate student academic and non-academic life to better serve the broad educational mission of the University." Duke's judicial approach "seems reasonable" for dealing with students who face both criminal (or civil) charges as well as campus judicial charges, the committee concluded. However, the university could do more to keep both faculty governance bodies and the broader community aware of how it is dealing with student disciplinary problems. The committee called for "systematic mechanisms for reporting on disciplinary actions" and regular meetings with neighborhood residents and other "major stakeholders." In addition to Coleman, the six faculty members who investigated the lacrosse team were Gary Gereffi, professor, sociology; Kerry Haynie, associate professor, political science; Kasibhatla; Tod Laursen, professor, Pratt School of Engineering; Martha Putallaz, professor, psychology, and executive director, Duke University Talent Identification Program; and Annabel Wharton, professor, art and art history. In addition to Kasibhatla, the seven committee members who reviewed student judicial processes and practices were Aura Gimm, assistant professor, biomedical engineering; Jackie Looney, associate dean for graduate student affairs, Graduate School; Rachel Lovingood, graduate student, Department of Cell Biology; Marjorie McElroy, professor, economics; Caroline Haynes, assistant clinical professor, psychiatry; Ben Ward, associate dean for student development, and associate professor, philosophy; and Gary Ybarra, associate professor, electrical and computer engineering




Editor's Note: A copy of the report is available  here. A copy of Brodhead's statement is here. 
Durham, N.C. - Duke University's administration "was much too slow in understanding and addressing the serious and highly sensitive issues raised by the rape allegations and associated events" involving the men's lacrosse team, a committee reported Friday to President Richard H. Brodhead. The committee found "no evidence, however, that this delay represented any effort to cover up the problems revealed by these events, to deceive anyone, or to play down the seriousness of the issues raised. The slowness was primarily the result of two failings -- both errors of judgment." The first was "a major failing in communications, and here the Duke Police Department and those to whom it reports bear primary responsibility," the committee said. The second was that key Duke administrators "seriously underestimated the seriousness of the allegations," relying too heavily on initial reports from members of the Durham police force that the alleged victim "kept changing her story and was not credible." Julius Chambers, a veteran civil rights attorney and former chancellor of North Carolina Central University, and William G. Bowen, president of The Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and former president of Princeton University, led the committee, which also included Danielle Carr Ramdath, who received her Ph.D. in mathematics from Duke and now serves as a member of the Mellon Foundation staff. The authors "have helped us learn from this difficult situation, and they have given those outside Duke an independent assessment of our actions," Brodhead responded in a statement. "I welcome the support in today's report for our general response after learning about the incident and for the multiple steps announced in my letter of April 5," Brodhead added. "I read with considerable interest the report's analysis of why the administration did not respond more swiftly to the incident and of how our work was complicated by the sporadic fashion in which information came to light. As Drs. Bowen and Chambers note, the situation was one of rapidly changing circumstances and considerable uncertainty -- indeed; the events at the heart of the case remain in dispute to this day." On April 5, Brodhead announced he would establish this and four other committees to investigate issues raised in the wake of the lacrosse team controversy. On May 1, two other committees issued reports on the  men's lacrosse team and Duke's  student judicial process. A fourth committee, called the Campus Culture Initiative, will submit by Dec. 1 its preliminary study of "the ways Duke educates students in the values of personal responsibility, consideration for others and mutual respect in the face of difference and disagreement." Also, a presidential council will scrutinize Duke's responses to the incident, advise the president on best practices in other university settings and consider ways the university can promote its values. The three reports, Brodhead's responses and extensive other information are available on the  website that Duke has created about the lacrosse team situation. In the latest report, the committee said it took far too long to notify Brodhead about the March 13 party at which white lacrosse team members have been accused of raping an African-American dancer, a charge the players have consistently denied. "Once he was in possession of the necessary information, President Brodhead has provided strong, consistent, and effective leadership in a situation that would try the talents and patience of even the most skillful leaders and crisis managers among us," according to the committee, which expressed "compassion" and "support" for the president. The communications problems began on the morning of March 14, according to the committee. Duke Police Director Robert Dean told Assistant Vice President of Student Affairs and Dean of Students Sue Wasiolek by telephone about the previous night's incident but did not mention that the woman was African American. Wasiolek immediately contacted members of the athletics department and her supervisor, Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta. The committee calls "extraordinary" the fact that Wasiolek, Moneta and senior administrators, including Brodhead, remained unaware until March 24 of the situation's racial aspects, which would later become prominent. Executive Vice President Tallman Trask III was notified early on about the incident, but other key officials, including Brodhead, did not learn of it "until much later." Nor did Duke Police pass along information about a 911 phone call in which a woman complained of racial slurs coming from the house where the party occurred.   Duke officials also were not aware of an inflammatory email message in which a lacrosse player proposed to kill and "skin" strippers until they read about it in an April 5 news story. Compounding such communications gaps, it was "a major mistake" by Duke police, Wasiolek, Moneta and others to take "at face value the reported comments of Durham police officers (and perhaps others)" on the morning of March 14 that the alleged victim "was not credible." Their assessment affected not only the senior administration's perception of the incident, but also that of lacrosse players who "may have been lulled into a false sense of security about the events shortly to unfold and might well have sought legal counsel sooner had they been aware of the stakes," according to the committee. Echoing findings from the previous two committees, the new report found "long-standing problems of campus discipline" and said "the lacrosse team was seen by at least some part of the Duke/Durham community as a manifestation of a white, elitist, arrogant sub-culture that was both indulged and self-indulgent." It said "the athletics department, and certainly those responsible for the lacrosse team, did not oversee properly the conduct of members of the team or succeed in instilling proper values," adding that "clearer and firmer actions in earlier days might well have reduced the likelihood that the party of March 13-14 would have unfolded as it did." However, the committee found "no evidence to support suggestions that the administration may have encouraged the athletes, or the athletics department, to cover up any conduct." Rather, "the administration tried to learn what it could about the events of March 13-14 directly from the lacrosse players and encouraged the players to be forthcoming." The committee praised Brodhead for his "unequivocal acceptance of responsibility for addressing the myriad issues raised by the allegations and the public reaction to them" once he began to learn what had occurred. "The depth of President Brodhead's personal commitment to address all of the issues associated not just with the allegations of rape and sexual assault at the party, but also with the party's "surround' seems clear to us -- and to almost everyone else with whom we have spoken," the committee said. However, it also said "the core group advising the President consisted largely of white men" and "the senior leadership of Duke was handicapped by its own limited diversity." Noting that the senior leadership was largely "inherited from a prior administration that was headed by an extremely able and outgoing white woman," the committee encouraged Brodhead "to find ways to bring a wider range of talented individuals to his council table." In his statement, Brodhead responded that he is "committed to bringing a range of perspectives to bear on discussions by the senior leadership." Later this month, Pamela Bernard will become Duke's vice president and university counsel. Her appointment, announced Jan. 31, was Brodhead's second vice presidential selection, following his decision a year earlier to name Benjamin D. Reese Jr. as vice president for institutional equity. Reese had been serving in the position on an interim basis. In another finding, the report called on Duke to consider changing its organizational structure to reduce "silos" and better integrate issues involving academics, athletics and student life. It also noted the perception of some local residents that oversight of community outreach efforts by the public affairs office can make it appear that Duke's "genuine interest in the welfare of the community" is instead driven by public relation concerns. The committee's suggestions include clearer guidelines for student conduct, a review of policies involving off-campus housing and alcohol consumption, a fresh look at the role of athletics and continued efforts to "promote better and stronger relationships with the Durham community." Citing "full cooperation from everyone with whom we have had contact at Duke," the committee said it reviewed "extensive written materials, including police reports, internal memos, email chains, and press clippings. To the best of our knowledge, nothing was kept from us."



Durham, N.C. - In my April 5 letter to the Duke community, I outlined a series of steps the university would take in response to the controversy raised by the men's lacrosse team party of March 13. Today I am releasing a report that reviews the response by the Duke administration as events unfolded after March 13. It is the result of an investigation by William Bowen, President of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation and former President of Princeton University, and Julius Chambers, former Executive Director of the NAACP Legal Defense Fund and former Chancellor of North Carolina Central University. They were assisted in their work by Danielle Carr Ramdath, a member of the Mellon Foundation staff and a Duke Ph.D. I welcome the support in today's report for our general response after learning about the incident and for the multiple steps announced in my letter of April 5. I read with considerable interest the report's analysis of why the administration did not respond more swiftly to the incident and of how our work was complicated by the sporadic fashion in which information came to light. As Drs. Bowen and Chambers note, the situation was one of rapidly changing circumstances and considerable uncertainty--indeed, the events at the heart of the case remain in dispute to this day. I also appreciate the report's candid suggestions regarding the communication issues that have come to light. Some of its recommendations echo those in the reports released last week, notably, improving communication between the athletic department and other parts of the Duke administration, and strengthening the oversight and expectations for student conduct, especially for athletes and students living off campus. We will be moving to address these issues in the weeks ahead. I also value the authors' insights into the administrative composition of the university and am committed to bringing a range of perspectives to bear on discussions by the senior leadership. Throughout the report, there is a tone of concern about the way Duke perceived and addressed the racial dimensions of the episode. The racial issues that have surfaced since March 13 have a long background in the history of our country, of Durham and of Duke. That's all the more reason why we must continue to strive to create a world of full equality and mutual respect across the lines of race. Promoting understanding and sensitivity in racial matters will be a major item on the agenda of the Campus Culture Initiative, another of the steps I announced for the University on April 5. In the larger community, I have been heartened by the cooperative spirit shown by a variety of leaders -- particularly Chancellor Ammons, Mayor Bell and Reverend Barber. I look forward to continuing the dialogue with them and others as we work to ensure mutual respect among all students and community members. In addition, Chancellor Ammons and I -- as well as others in our administrations -- are continuing to explore further areas of cooperation between Duke and North Carolina Central University. Today's report, plus the two released last week on the lacrosse team's history prior to March 13 and on Duke's student judicial processes and practices, are posted on  a special website. I invite you to read all the reports, which contain valuable insight and information.  William Bowen and Julius Chambers have distinguished themselves in many ways over their remarkable careers. That they gave of their time to investigate Duke's administrative response is a great service indeed. They have helped us learn from this difficult situation, and they have given those outside Duke an independent assessment of our actions. I thank them for their analysis and, still more, for their wisdom.




Editor's Note:  John F. Burness is senior vice president for public affairs and government relations. A pdf file of the operations report can be found  here.  
Durham, N.C. - Since release of the report yesterday (8 May) by William Bowen and Julius Chambers, we have received numerous requests for the Duke Police operations report of 14 March concerning the incident at 610 N. Buchanan Blvd. Duke Police operation reports are confidential internal documents. Given that a number of statements in the operations report of 14 March have already been made public in the Bowen-Chambers report, we have decided to post it on the Duke website. This action is not and should not be considered a precedent for the release in the future of any Duke Police operations reports.




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: John F. Burness is senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke 
Durham, N.C. - Over the past several weeks, Duke University officials and others in our community have emphasized the importance of not rushing to judgment and letting the legal system establish the truth regarding the incident of March 13. Today a grand jury handed down an indictment against David Evans, who just graduated from Duke and was among the occupants of the house at 610 N. Buchanan Blvd. It is important to remember that an indictment is not a conviction. Ultimately, the District Attorney will be responsible for presenting his evidence, and a jury will decide the innocence or guilt of Mr. Evans and the other two young men who have been charged. As Duke President Richard H. Brodhead has said consistently, a person in our legal system is innocent until proven guilty. It is worth repeating again today that these latest charges do not mean the accused are guilty. That is for a jury to decide. From the start, our campus and the Durham community have faced the challenge of balancing compassion with judgment. We all hope that the legal process will proceed to a speedy resolution so that everyone can know the truth.




Editor's Note: John F. Burness is senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke University. 
Durham, N.C. - "Media reports to the contrary, President Brodhead has not yet made a decision on the future of men's lacrosse at Duke."




Editor's Note: This statement was written by Director of Athletics Joseph Alleva in a June 5 memo to Duke President Richard H. Brodhead. 
Durham, N.C. - I have reviewed and endorse the mission statement and team standards developed by the student-athletes on Duke Men's Lacrosse team. The sentiments and guidelines they express are consistent with the expectations we have for the lacrosse team and, indeed, for all Duke student-athletes. As you know, over the summer, I am working with the coaches in athletics on developing a new code of conduct for all of our athletic programs. I expect that to be completed by this summer for review by the Athletics Council and you. I hope that the members of the lacrosse team will continue to excel in the classroom and on the field and that their behavior on campus and in the community will become exemplary in the years to come. However, should violations of these standards occur, the penalties will be swift and appropriate and will be determined by the head coach, the Director of Athletics, and the President of the University. With these commitments in hand, we are prepared for a new beginning for the men's lacrosse program at Duke.



Durham, N.C. - Thank you John, and thank you all for being here today. As John mentioned, today's press conference is the continuation of our effort to give you an open and candid look at the actions the university takes as we address the serious issues raised by the events of March 13. As part of that process, we have turned our examination inward and, with the help of two faculty committees and one external committee, have taken a hard look at what the university could have done differently both in the lead-up to March 13 and in the period following. Throughout this period, we have taken great care to respect the ongoing criminal investigation, and I have repeatedly stressed the importance of allowing this investigation to run its course and of allowing the truth to be established by the legal process before we pass judgment. I reiterate that today. Since my last letter, three members of the men's lacrosse team have been indicted on felony charges. As you know, they proclaim their innocence on all counts. Over the last nine weeks, some media reports have advanced the case against the students, and others attacked the credibility of the accuser. In the end however, none of us know for certain what did or did not happen at the March 13 party. This much IS certain: rape is an abomination, and if the allegations in the indictments are proven true, these students will deserve severe punishment for a heinous act. If, however, it is determined that the allegations are false, then these students themselves will have been the victims of a serious injustice, one that will deserve its own stern condemnation. For now we must continue to take the matter seriously and suspend final judgment toward an uncertainty that only the courts can resolve. Now, on to the reason we invited you here today. Much has happened in the weeks since April 5, when I sent a long letter to the Duke community. In that letter I outlined steps that we would take to deal with the issues over which the university does have control. Two months to the day later, I want to update you on what we have done and announce further steps we will be taking going forward. As you know, I have received reports from three of the committees I announced on April 5. Those reports, which are available on the Duke website, include an examination of the adequacy of Duke's disciplinary procedures; an inquiry into the prior history of behavior of the men's lacrosse team; and an assessment of the response to this event by the Duke administration. These committees asked tough questions and the university has benefited from their independent reviews of a series of important issues. I know you are anxious to get to your questions so let me quickly summarize the steps Duke is taking to respond to the recommendations of these reports. You can find a more detailed discussion of these steps in my letter to the Duke community being released today, which also is on the Duke website. Campus Culture As I've noted on other occasions, one striking effect of this spring's events is that they highlighted larger issues of campus culture that require our attention whether the legal charges are upheld or not. In the wake of events this spring, it is apparent that we need to clarify the standards of behavior that will be expected of ALL of Duke's students, including behavior that is thoughtless of others, among them our off campus neighbors, as well as disrespectful behavior across lines of race, gender and other forms of difference. A committee is at work to propose the needed adjustments, and I expect a report this fall. In addition to rules and sanctions, we also need to promote Duke's values in a positive fashion, and create an atmosphere where students will have frequent opportunities to reflect on their choices and internalize an ethic of responsibility and mutual respect. The Campus Culture Initiative, led by Vice Provost Robert Thompson and Vice President Larry Moneta, has begun the task of assessing current needs and making recommendations. My charge to the Campus Culture group is to look at all of those issues, at our expectations for our students, the values and behaviors we aim to instill, and the ways that students relate to one another. I have also directed this group to offer specific recommendations about how we might address the culture of campus drinking. These are complicated issues faced by all universities, and they won't be solved in a day--but we are determined to address them and make real progress. I expect this committee's preliminary report at the close of the fall semester, but our efforts will require far-reaching conversations with faculty and students that will be ongoing for some time. As you know, I have also empanelled a Presidential Council of distinguished figures from outside Duke to be a sounding board for our efforts and critiquing our recommendations. You'll find the names of its members in my letter.   Athletics To speak more particularly of athletics: Duke has great traditions of athletic excellence and I am eager for Duke to continue these traditions. But as this university has long recognized, we must pursue our athletic goals within a larger context of educational values, and not as ends in themselves. The committee reports made a number of recommendations on how we can better coordinate athletic values with wider university values, and we are in the process of implementing these recommendations. The reports recommend that we create an explicit code of conduct for student athletes. Athletics Director Alleva is leading that process, which will be completed by fall. The reports also recommend that we create better communication between Athletics, Student Affairs, and Duke Police so that coaches and athletics administrators can learn of behavior issues involving student athletes in a fuller and timelier manner. That project too is already well advanced. In addition, as my letter outlines in more detail, I am making several changes in the university's oversight of athletics. Effective immediately, I am restoring direct responsibility for athletics to the President of the University. I have also asked that the Athletics Director or his representative be included in the Provost's Undergraduate Leadership Group, to ensure that academic, athletic, and student life issues are dealt with as a coordinated and integrated whole. In addition I will be proposing modifications in the university's Athletics Council, the committee charged by the Trustees and the faculty with overseeing athletics at Duke.     Lacrosse Finally, I have decided to permit the resumption of men's lacrosse. Assistant Coach Kevin Cassese will serve as interim coach while Joe Alleva conducts a search for a permanent coach. I have received a great deal of advice on this issue. Let me share the thinking that led to my decision this weekend to reinstate this program. When I announced the indefinite suspension of the men's lacrosse season on April 5, suspicion seemed to swirl around virtually all members of the team--all but one, you will recall, were required to submit to DNA testing--and we had no concept of the dimensions of the emerging legal case. After the District Attorney announced his indictment of a third player, however, he exonerated the other 44 team members of criminal charges. This is, of course, a significant change. On the other hand, I also had to weigh the findings of the Coleman Committee, the group charged with assessing this team's conduct before March 13. While their report did not validate the worst charges against the team, it did establish a pattern of irresponsible behavior, much of it aggravated by drink. And I have remained concerned about the March 13 party itself, an event that, even setting aside the disputed criminal matters, clearly involved highly inappropriate and unacceptable behavior by members of this team, as their captains long ago acknowledged. I told the team when I met with them last month that, if and when we were to resume the play of lacrosse, we simply could not return to the status quo as of March 12 of this year. As I wrestled with this issue, I decided that Duke should only resume men's lacrosse if we made a clear statement of the conduct we expect of the players going forward; if the players actively accepted responsibility for living up to these expectations; and if we had a strong oversight mechanism to monitor the situation. These conditions have now been met to my satisfaction. Last Friday I received a mission statement and a standard of conduct that the players have written and pledge to uphold. The new communications and oversight structures that I described will give us the means to monitor the team's future conduct and respond promptly as needed. I am, I know, taking a risk in reinstating men's lacrosse. The reinstatement is inevitably probationary: if we begin to see patterns of irresponsible individual or team behaviors familiar from the past, the Athletics Director and I will have no choice but to revisit this decision, and we won't hesitate to do so. On the other hand, if we did not allow these players the chance to take responsibility for creating a new history for their sport at Duke, we would be denying another very fundamental value: the belief in the possibility of learning from experience, the belief in education itself. None of us is free from the liability to err: that's why we need education. To make a mistake, to recognize it as such, and to take responsibility for making a change might be said to be the essence of education. That is the opportunity now available to our team. I said at our last press conference what I continue to believe: that over time, Duke will be judged not by the events of March 13, but by how we face and learn from those events. I am committed to drawing the lessons of those events and it is my hope that in so doing we will make a great university better. Unless others here wish to add some comments of their own, we are pleased to take your questions.



Durham, N.C. - On April 5, in the face of allegations arising from a party held by the men's lacrosse team, I wrote to outline steps the university would take in response to this complex situation. At term's end, I am eager to update you on what we have done and to announce further steps going forward. First let me report that, after a difficult spring, the Duke Commencement this year was particularly wonderful. Giving the Baccalaureate Address in Duke Chapel, I had the opportunity to look down into thousands of faces of shining promise -- the faces of students full of pride in what they had accomplished, sorrow at leaving a place they had come to love, and eager anticipation for what they are now equipped to do. On Friday evening I crossed paths with the perfect embodiment of this blend of achievement and future promise: the one hundred Duke Medical School graduates setting off to take the Hippocratic Oath. Though a thunderstorm passed through just before dawn, the skies were clear for Commencement Sunday, and the campus was radiantly beautiful. John Hope Franklin, the founder of the field of African American history and a powerful contributor to the civil rights movement, spoke of the power of individuals to make a difference to the continuing challenges of our time.Yazan Kopty '06, the student speaker for the event, spoke with an assurance, maturity, and wisdom that showed the fruits of education at their best. After weeks of absorption in a story that often made Duke seem synonymous with bad student behavior, Commencement weekend was deeply refreshing. It gave a powerful reminder of the human promise we are privileged to work with and of the growth students get by attending this great school. It's important to keep this larger picture in mind as we try to put the men's lacrosse story in perspective. But it is essential that we take that episode seriously as well. Only by facing up to the challenges of this situation will we get the good of these difficult times. An update. Since I wrote last, three members of the men's lacrosse team have been indicted on felony charges arising from the March 13 party. The students proclaim their innocence on all the counts. As you probably know, initial reports circulated through the media advanced the case against the students; more recent reports have made the case in their favor. But none of us has direct access to the criminal investigation, and until the full evidence is presented, none of us can know with certainty what did or did not happen. As I have said, it's essential that we allow the criminal justice system to run its course, and that we wait for the truth to be established before we reach final judgment. In the meanwhile, we need to remember that the American legal system is based on the principle of the presumption of innocence. When he handed down his third indictment on May 15, District Attorney Nifong stated that no other students were under investigation; with the cloud of suspicion lifted from other members of the team, the legal case has taken on finite boundaries. Now we must wait for the legal process to do its work. In the past month, I have received reports from three of the committees I announced on April 5. These include an inquiry into the adequacy of Duke's disciplinary procedures, especially as they relate to off-campus behavior; an inquiry into the prior history of behavior of the men's lacrosse team; and an assessment of the response to this event by the Duke administration. These reports are available at the Duke website here. Let me inform you of the steps Duke is taking to respond to the recommendations of these reports. 1. Campus Culture. As I explained in my April 5 letter, a striking feature of the recent episode is the attention it has drawn to questions of student conduct that range far beyond the March 13 party and that are sources of concern whether the legal charges are upheld or not. These include behavior that is thoughtless of others, among them our off-campus neighbors; disrespectful behavior across lines of race, gender, and other forms of difference; and the abuse of alcohol.  In the wake of events of this spring, we have recognized the need to clarify the standards of behavior that will be expected of all Duke students. We also need to clarify our expectations for students in off-campus settings. A committee is at work to propose the needed adjustments and I expect a report this fall, once students have returned and become involved in the discussion.  But important though they are, regulations and enforcement mechanisms alone will not solve the problem. We must also promote our institution's values in positive fashion, and create an atmosphere where students will have frequent opportunities to reflect on their choices and internalize an ethic of responsibility and mutual respect. The Campus Culture Initiative, led by Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education and Dean of Trinity College Robert Thompson and Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta and composed of a large cross-section of faculty, students, and administrators, has been given the task of assessing current needs and making recommendations. The charge to the committee and its membership can be read at http://www.dukenews.duke.edu/mmedia/features/lacrosse_incident/committees.html#campusculture.  When the Campus Culture Initiative was announced, I mentioned that I would establish a Presidential Council to act as a sounding board for our efforts, critiquing our recommendations and setting an appropriately high standard for our work. I'm pleased to announce the membership of this group. It will be co-chaired by former trustees Wilhelmina Reuben-Cooke ‘67, a member of the first cohort of African American undergraduates admitted to Duke and now Provost of the University of the District of Columbia, and Roy Bostock ‘62, who has led a distinguished business career and now chairs the Partnership for a Drug-Free America. Judy Woodruff ‘68, the respected broadcast journalist and another former trustee, will serve as well, as will three leaders in higher education: Shirley Tilghman, President of Princeton University; Morton Schapiro, President of Williams College; and Phail Wynn, a notable Durhamite and President of the Durham Technical Community College. Four younger alumni have also agreed to serve: Adam Silver '84 (NBA Deputy Commissioner and Chief Operating Officer, effective July 1), Sarah Dodds-Brown ‘95 (currently counsel for the American Express Company and a former young trustee), Julian Harris ‘00 (a medical student at the University of Pennsylvania and former head of the Duke Honor Council), and Katie Laidlaw ‘04 (associate with The Parthenon Group in Boston and currently a young trustee).  None of the issues we are grappling with is peculiar to Duke. But if they are widespread on American college campuses, that's not a reason for us to ignore them. The current crisis gives Duke an opportunity to "step up" and take a leadership position on issues of broad concern in American education. If we make this a place where students will learn as much at the level of character and ethical reflection as they do of academic intelligence -- if we make this the kind of place where all students will grow in their ability to act thoughtfully and responsibly and to treat one another with dignity and respect -- we'll have made Duke a better school. 2. Athletics. When athletics entered American schools and universities, it was recognized not just as increasing the fun, but as promoting character values highly relevant to education: among them, discipline, teamwork, the drive for excellence, and sportsmanlike adherence to codes of fairness and respect. Duke has great traditions of athletic excellence, and I intend to continue them. But I'm also eager for Duke to continue to pursue athletics within a larger universe of educational values, not as an end in itself. In the wake of this spring's event, some have questioned whether Division I athletics has a place at a school as academically strong as Duke. I would reply that if it isn't easy to get the balance right, it's also not clear that the task is impossible. I would rather work to put athletic goals in proper relation to our academic mission than to "solve" the problem by throwing out half of the equation.  This spring has shown us steps we should take to strengthen athletics at Duke. The committee reports underline that we need much better communication between Athletics, Student Affairs, and the Duke police, so that coaches and athletics administrators can learn of behavior issues involving student athletes in a fuller and timelier manner. The reports also recommend that we clarify the expectations for addressing such behavior and create a code of conduct for student athletes. These projects are underway and will be completed by fall.   In addition, I am announcing several changes in the oversight of athletics. While the Athletics Director reports to the President, some years ago Duke transferred day-by-day oversight to the Executive Vice President. This has worked well enough in practice, but it gives the wrong signal about the place of athletics in the university. Starting at once, I am restoring direct responsibility for athletics to the President of the University. With my oversight, athletics will continue to work with the EVP on matters of facilities and budget. I will also ask the Provost to include the Athletics Director or his senior representative in the deliberations of the Undergraduate Leadership Group -- consisting of senior academic and student life administrators – to overcome any separation of academics, athletics, and student life. Finally, to ensure that we have the means to monitor successfully the policies and practices in athletics, I will be proposing modifications in the university's Athletic Council, the committee charged by the Trustees and the faculty with overseeing athletics at Duke.  3. Lacrosse. I announced the cancellation of the remainder of the 2006 men's lacrosse season in my letter of April 5. The committee reports having been received and the District Attorney having announced that he does not intend to seek any further indictments, the question arises whether to resume play. When I met with the members of the team last month, I told them that, if and when Duke resumes the playing of men's lacrosse, we cannot return to the status quo as of March 12. Though it did not confirm the worst allegations against this team, the Coleman Committee documented a history of irresponsible conduct that this university cannot allow to continue.  I have received a great deal of advice on both sides of the question. As I wrestled with this issue, I decided that Duke should only resume men's lacrosse if we made a clear statement of the conduct we expect of the players going forward; if the players made a commitment to live by these expectations; and if we had a strong oversight mechanism to monitor the situation. These conditions have now been met to my satisfaction, so I have decided to permit the resumption of men's lacrosse, with assistant coach Kevin Cassese serving as interim coach. The standard of conduct that the team has proposed for itself and Athletics Director Alleva's response can be found at http://news.duke.edu/lacrosseincident/.  Let me also say a word about the players. These students have lived through an extraordinarily painful situation for the last eight weeks. Whether or not the felony charges are upheld against the three indicted students, the fact is that members of the team engaged in irresponsible and dishonorable behavior on the evening of March 13, and those who were involved bear responsibility for their actions. For all that, few of us have suffered an ordeal like the one that unfolded as intense media interest turned this event into a worldwide news story. Setting aside the legal charges, which must be resolved in court, I am pleased that team members have acknowledged the error of their conduct and have made the commitment to create a new history for themselves and their sport at Duke. We will take care to assure ourselves that these changes of heart and conduct do in fact happen -- but it's important that we believe in their possibility. None of us is free from the liability to err: that's why we need education. To make a mistake, to recognize it as such, and to take responsibility for making a change might be said to be the essence of education. That is the opportunity now available to our team. Final Remarks. We have work to do outside our walls as well. In the face of media accounts that tended to portray the university and the city of Durham, or Duke and North Carolina Central University, as antagonists, I've been grateful for all the Durham leaders who have recognized that truth and justice are common values, things we must pursue and uphold together. When this story is over, however it is resolved, we must continue to work together to strengthen this city, and I pledge that Duke will do its part. North Carolina Central Chancellor James Ammons and I have recently met to explore existing collaborations and areas where our schools could cooperate yet more extensively, and we will be continuing this exploration in the months ahead. This will be a further gain we can bring from the trials of recent weeks. I said early on that this university will be judged not by the events that happened here but by how we face them and learn from them. I am committed to drawing the lessons of recent events, and it's my hope that by doing so, we will make a great university better. When I was first attracted to Duke, one of the qualities I found striking was this institution's lack of commitment to the status quo: its willingness to take candid measure of its strengths and to make the changes that would enable it to grow and improve. This trait has helped fuel Duke's continual rise in the ranks of great American universities. Let's use this occasion to make further progress. Richard H. Brodhead President




Editor's Note: Editor's Note: On Oct. 15, 2006, the CBS News show "60 Minutes" devoted more than half of its program to the Duke lacrosse case. After the show aired, "60 Minutes" posted on its website portions of interviews that it conducted for its show but did not air. These outtakes included several comments from Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead's hour-long interview in August with CBS's Ed Bradley. The outtakes can be viewed here; a transcript of them follows below. 
Richard Brodhead [RB]:  I had to take personal leadership of this issue really from the first day.  It was obviously a story of that magnitude.  I thought my role was to remind this community and to speak on behalf of this community in speaking about the seriousness of the crime that was alleged while also reminding people of the serious obligation we all have not to pre-judge people before the facts are in.  Ed Bradley [EB]:  You've said that it was a very difficult situation to get right.  Do you think you got it right? RB:  The facts kept changing.  Every day we learned new things that no one knew the day before.  Every day we were being urged to speak with certainty about facts that were full of great uncertainty at that point.  Our policy all along was to act on the basis of the things we knew for sure and to withhold action and decision on the things we didn't know for sure.  EB:  You met with three captains of the lacrosse team.  And from what I'm told in explaining to you what happened that night and proclaimed to you their innocence as well as the innocence of all the players who were there -- . RB:  That's right. EB:  What did you say to that? RB:  These are my students, too.  When they came in, I said to them, "The first thing you've got to do is tell the truth."  You know, however bad things are is bad enough but the only way you can be sure you can make it worse is if you don't tell the truth because soon enough the truth will be established."  They told me  --  first of all, they expressed their extreme regret and contrition for the episode of the evening, for the shame it had brought on them, the shame it had brought on their families and the shame it had brought on the university.  I was glad to hear that from them.  But they also categorically denied that the rape had taken place. Do you think I don't spend time thinking about those students -- the indicted students?  Their families? The difficulty everybody has gone through in this case?  I just want to say I can't move from that, though, to saying, "Carry on your trial if you wish.  As for me, I've already reached my verdict." It's just an inappropriate action for me to take in spite of the powerful feelings I know that would push in such a direction.  EB:  Is alcohol consumption out of control at Duke? RB:  My honest belief is that alcohol consumption at Duke is probably not very different from on most American campuses.  When I talk to presidents of other universities  --  you know, you can't imagine, or maybe you can imagine, how many other university leaders have come up to me knowing that this particular mess landed on my doorstep but how easily it could have landed on someone else's.  And everyone understands that the issue of alcohol  --  alcohol is not the only issue here but it certainly aggravated all the issues. EB:  And then there's the issue of race in this case  --  not only because the accuser is black and the players are white but because of some of the racial comments that were made that night.  RB:   That's right. EB:  Given the history of this campus, and the city of Durham here in North Carolina, what troubles you most there? RB:  To hear that any member of this community called any other member of this world  --  I'm not talking just Durham, I'm not just talking our students  --  by a racial epithet, there's something just profoundly depressing about that.  I'd like to think that students wouldn't have said these things when sober but the fact that they said them when drunk is no comfort to me.  EB:  So what do you say to African Americans -- to people of color about the culture here at the Duke campus and whether or not people who are different or minorities are made welcome here. RB:  A person walking on this campus would see the answer in part pretty quickly.  Forty percent of the undergraduate students at Duke come from one or another minority of the American population and about 10 percent of them African-American.  This university, like every other university in the South and de facto many in the North, closed its doors to African Americans up until a certain date that's now about 40 years ago.  But I'll tell you, when Duke decided to write a different history for itself, it really pursued that history pretty aggressively.  We have a wonderful history of African American alumni who've come out of this school.  I could tell you lots of examples.  Current students here -- really impressive, serious, gifted people.  Faculty  --  you tell me a field and I'll tell you a distinguished African American faculty member we have in that field.  EB:  What did you think of that  --  statements by the public officials, by the district attorney? RB:  Well, at the time the statements were made, I had no way of knowing anything other than the fact that they must be true.  There's no doubt about it that that helped to create the climate at the beginning in which an awful lot of people were absolutely certain that these kids had done this deed.  And, of course, that was one of the really difficult things in the spring was trying to remind people that our system is based on the presumption of innocence and that we all needed to work to offer our students that. EB:  Do you think that the district attorney has conducted a fair and unbiased investigation? RB:  Well, I'll respond to you in this way.  I have read all the same things that everybody else in America has read and seen on TV about this case and I share the concerns of people in general.  I think the public has a legitimate interest in knowing whether this is a real case, whether this was a case that was brought in an honest and straightforward fashion.  You know, I've said over and over again if our players are found guilty, they've done an abominable thing and should be punished for it. But if these people whose names have become known across this country and around the world for something they didn't do because of a false accusation, that's a pretty serious injustice, too.  And if it's been further aggravated by a case being brought that didn't have strong legs under it in the first place, that's an injustice, too.  We have to wait for the legal system to grind on to its conclusion but when this thing goes before a judge and a jury, my view is that the DA's case will be on trial as much as our players will be on trial.



Durham, NC - In the aftermath of Friday's hearing, Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead made the following statement:    "Under American law, the legal system is the place to establish the facts and bring a case to a just resolution. For that reason, it is of the essence that everyone involved in the legal system act fairly in pursuing the truth and protecting the rights of the individuals involved. As I told Ed Bradley during a ‘60 Minutes' interview last summer, given the concerns that have been raised, when it goes before a judge and jury the DA's case will be on trial just as much as our students will be. In the meanwhile, as I have said before, our students must be presumed innocent until proven otherwise."   Segments of President Brodhead's interview with Ed Bradley on "60 Minutes" on Aug. 28, 2006, are available on Duke's website, http://www.dukenews.duke.edu/2006/12/60_minutes.html. 



Durham, NC - In response to Durham District Attorney Mike Nifong's decision Friday to drop rape charges in the lacrosse case, Duke University President Richard H. Brodhead issued the following statement:    "I am greatly relieved for the students and their families that the most serious of the charges has been dropped. Given the certainty with which the district attorney made his many public statements regarding the rape allegation, his decision today to drop that charge must call into question the validity of the remaining charges.    "The district attorney should now put this case in the hands of an independent party, who can restore confidence in the fairness of the process. Further, Mr. Nifong has an obligation to explain to all of us his conduct in this matter."   




Editor's Note: John F. Burness is senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke 
Durham, NC - "This afternoon's announcement from the North Carolina State Bar makes all the more appropriate, as President Brodhead said last week, that 'The district attorney should now put this case in the hands of an independent party, who can restore confidence in the fairness of the process.'"



Durham, NC - "We have decided that the right and fair thing to do is to welcome back Reade Seligmann and Collin Finnerty to resume their studies at Duke for the spring semester. Although the students still face serious charges and larger issues require Duke's collective attention, the circumstances in this case have changed substantially, and it is appropriate that the students have an opportunity to continue their education."   _        _  _  _     Below is the text of a Jan. 2 memo sent by Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta to President Brodhead regarding the status of Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann:    "In response to your question about what is appropriate regarding the status of Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann, after consulting with Vice Provost of Undergraduate Education Robert Thompson and Provost Peter Lange, I recommend that these students should now be allowed to return to Duke and continue their education. While the legal situation they face is not yet resolved and the students still face serious charges, the totality of circumstances has changed in a way that makes it appropriate for us to remove the barriers to their returning and resuming their student careers.    "In the practice of Duke and many other universities, students are typically separated from the university when they are charged with behaviors involving violence. This interim suspension is imposed in recognition of the risks to the community and to the students themselves if they were allowed to remain. Interim suspension is not a disciplinary measure or judgment of guilt. Rather, it is a way to deal with the interim before such charges are resolved.    "Our two students were placed on interim suspension when they were indicted last spring. In late summer, Duke modified the suspension to an administrative leave, which allowed the students to continue to make academic progress while not present at the university. Both have completed their coursework from last spring and are currently in good academic standing.   "Our measures to date have attempted to fit a wise and prudent general policy to the facts of an extraordinary case. As circumstances have evolved, we have attempted to balance recognition of the gravity of legal charges with the presumption of innocence, and concern for the well-being of the community with the students' needs to continue their education. As we approach a new term, I believe that the circumstances warrant that we strike this balance at a different point.  "As you noted in your statement on December 22, circumstances have clearly changed.  At this point, further extension of the students' leaves would do unwarranted harm to their educational progress. For this reason, I recommend that the administrative leave be lifted and they be allowed to re-enroll for the spring term.  "Needless to say, the students would remain subject to further disciplinary action should they be found criminally responsible for any of the charges pending.  "Vice Provost Thompson has discussed this proposed change with Dean Michele Rasmussen, who helped craft the new administrative leave policy, and she is supportive of this change in their status. Dean Rasmussen would remain the academic dean for these students through the re-entry process." 



Durham, NC - Dear Members of the Duke Community: I write to greet you at the start of a new year. I also want to address some important developments that have taken place while the University was on break, and to offer some thoughts as we go forward. Last spring, this community became embroiled in a major controversy arising from a party held by members of the men's lacrosse team. It is universally acknowledged that the behavior at the party was inappropriate and unacceptable. Several factors came together to intensify the emotional response to this event. Though vehemently denied by team members, the accusations that resulted from the party raised deeply troubling questions about sexual violence and racial subjugation, issues of fundamental concern to any decent community. Passions were further intensified by a series of statements by the Durham District Attorney Mike Nifong that a rape had indeed taken place. Intense media coverage heightened these passions, promoting an air of instant certainty about rapidly changing "facts." In the confusion of this situation, the University's response was guided by two principles: that if true, the conduct that had been alleged was grave and should be taken very seriously, and that our students had to be presumed innocent until proven guilty through the legal process. As perceptions of the story changed, the University continued to maintain the need for broad deference to the legal process. If this case has taught us anything, it is our need for a legal process based in fairness, the rule of evidence, and withholding judgment until the truth is established. In an interview with "60 Minutes" last fall, I noted that given the concerns that had been raised, when the case came before a judge and jury, Mr. Nifong's case would be on trial as much as the students would.  But as that comment recognized, the road to a resolution necessarily involved going through legal process, not outside or around it. In mid-December, there were important developments as the legal process entered the courtroom. These included the revelation, in sworn testimony, that the district attorney had not shared with the indicted students potentially exculpatory evidence from the DNA tests. Also, on December 22, the Friday afternoon before Christmas, the district attorney announced that he was dropping the rape charge because the accuser was no longer certain about her claim. After Christmas, the North Carolina State Bar announced that it had reviewed concerns about the district attorney's public statements and found grounds to file a formal complaint. Days later, the North Carolina Conference of District Attorneys also called on Mr. Nifong to recuse himself in this case. On December 22, I issued a statement saying that, given the certainty with which the district attorney made his public statements regarding the rape allegation, his decision to drop that charge must call into question the validity of the remaining charges. I added that the district attorney should now put this case in the hands of an independent party, who can restore confidence in the fairness of the process. That last phrase is, for me, the heart of the matter. We entrust our conflicts to the law to provide a path to a fair resolution. But to earn this faith from the public, those who work in the legal process must behave with elemental fairness and regard for the rights of those involved. We need and deserve for that faith to be restored. In the wake of these new circumstances, I concluded upon the recommendation of Vice President Moneta that we should offer reinstatement to Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann so that they can return to Duke and resume their studies. (David Evans graduated last spring.) Interim suspension, the policy measure that had been invoked last April, is not a disciplinary measure or judgment of guilt. It is a temporary measure taken when a student is charged with a violent crime, and its use must balance a variety of factors, including the gravity of the charge, the presumption of innocence, the possibility of danger to the student or the community, and the need of students to continue with their education. Although the two students still face serious charges, in the changed circumstances, it seems only right to strike the balance at a different point. The fair thing is to allow the students to continue with their studies. We all pray that the legal matter will be resolved in a fair and speedy fashion. But as a university, we also need to look to the future and see how we can learn from this chapter of history. By facing the lessons of this painful episode, we can make Duke a better place. Let me outline a few specifics.   First, we still have work to do on this campus. One thing that has made this event so difficult is that particular charges against individuals have tended to be conflated with larger community issues of race, gender, privilege, and respect. During these hard months, some have seemed to imply that if you insist on the students' innocence, then you must not care about the underlying issues. Others have seemed to suggest that if you insist on the underlying issues, then you must not care about fair treatment for the students. But it is essential that we separate the legal case from the larger cultural issues and give each its separate, appropriate response. The Campus Culture Initiative, begun last year and due to report this spring, is not a referendum on the party last March. It is an effort to visualize the best community we could make for students to grow and learn in, a community of mutual respect and vibrant mutual engagement. It will be all of our work to advance toward that goal. I see this as a chance to build on existing strengths in our educational experience and to press toward higher ambitions: the latest chapter in Duke's long history of self-improvement. Just as important, we must work together to restore the fabric of mutual respect. One of the things I have most regretted is the way students and faculty have felt themselves disparaged and their views caricatured in ongoing debates, often by individuals - sometimes anonymous - outside the Duke community. In the age of instantaneous worldwide media coverage, members of the lacrosse team were judged around the world on the basis of highly selective, highly prejudicial coverage last spring. A number of them were subjected to vile abuse. More recently, a group of Duke faculty members (including a number of African American faculty) have been widely attacked in blogs and emails - and in some cases personally attacked in highly repugnant and vicious terms - based on caricatured accounts of their statements on the lacrosse event. We want to see an end to these destructive assaults.  We cannot change the nature of modern communications, but we can make an effort on this campus to promote more constructive dialogue and a more charitable atmosphere for exchange. This does not mean that troublesome issues should now be avoided. It's the mark of maturity in a university when hard issues can be freely and vigorously engaged, and this past year has shown us many areas in need of discussion and debate. But it does mean that we need to be less quick to take offense at the words of others, and work harder to understand what others are actually trying to say - even if we then disagree with it. In its very difficulty, this moment gives us a chance to strengthen the climate of respectful engagement in this community, and it is crucial that we come together to seize the chance. Turning conflict among divergent points of view into the basis for mutual education is at the core of the university's work. Last, in the heat of recent debates, there's been a danger that we will lose sight of something fundamental, and I want to say it on all of our behalf. This is a great university, one of the greatest in the world. The vigor, intelligence, and devotion of each member of this community - faculty, students, and staff - are what make Duke great. This place needs all of us. And all of us are incalculably lucky to be part of this place, and to have the others who surround us for partners and colleagues. Duke can and will become better yet, and it's our business to make it so. This is the season of the New Year - a time for new starts and fresh beginnings. Let's work together to make our university as great as it can be.  




Editor's Note: Peter Lange, provost of Duke University, made the following address Jan. 11 to the Arts and Sciences Council. 
Durham, NC - Colleagues, When the events of the spring unfolded we witnessed an unimagined intensity of vituperative language and distasteful and deeply hurtful caricatures of Duke students, our campus and its culture, our Durham community and our relationship to our neighbors in the city. The wave of attacks lasted for weeks in the media, on the emails and in the blogs. It was deeply disturbing, in many ways for our students, faculty and whole community. It inflamed and polarized rhetoric on our campus as well. Over the months and with the unfolding of events, these types of attacks have subsided. Meanwhile some of our faculty, primarily African-American but not only so, have been under repeated attacks in personal emails and in blogs. The primary precipitant  --  in the sense that the content offended those writing the blogs or sending the emails  --  was the advertisement signed by 88 of Duke's faculty and printed in the Duke Chronicle. Subsequently, the connection to the advertisement often has become attenuated and the ad has become rhetorically transformed into and manipulated as a symbol of all that was thought to be extreme and bad about Duke faculty, and, in some cases, universities more generally. At the same time, the emails and blogs attacking what people wrote or said have sometimes been replaced by personal attacks, some of them directed at the faculty member's scholarship or intellectual credentials, some viciously personal, still others openly threatening or racist. These attacks through emails and blogs have prompted appeals that the administration, and I, as Provost come to the "defense" of, our faculty. Yet, until today I have said nothing publicly about this. I want today to explain the sources of my concerns, the reasons for my previous reticence to speak out and why I am now doing so. I am under no illusion that this will quiet the distasteful clamor from beyond Duke. I do hope to contribute to a restoration of engaged, sometimes intense, but also mutually respectful dialogue on our campus. As we all are aware blogs and email have "democratized" communication; anyone with access to a computer can get in the game as writer or spectator. In many ways this is a very good thing, for it reduces the elitism of "publication" and the control of opinion by opinion "sellers". Nonetheless, this "democracy" is also permissive of saying almost anything, about almost anyone or anything, using any language, no matter how distasteful, disrespectful or dismissive. We can spread our ideas faster, and without the mediation of others, but we can also control neither their dispersion nor the nature and distribution of reactions to them. In fact, if those reactions distort the account of what we have said, there is likely no way to correct the record for the large number of people who may have secondarily received those distorted interpretations. This is a condition of our era. No one can provide relief and these conditions do not change the basic fact that one must take care to say what one intends and be prepared to be accountable for and to defend the substance of one's ideas, and correct or incorrect interpretations of them. Free speech must continue to be vigorously defended, but speaking freely has become potentially more consequential. And here my first concern. I do not believe the extreme of this condition is productive of the best virtues of free speech. It can come to inhibit speaking freely or leave free speech on controversial issues too much to the thick-skinned or insensitive. The virtues of free speech are that it fosters individual intellectual development through the process of the combat of ideas, that it encourages the honing of thought, that it enriches the intellectual life of the community, that it allows for the challenge of dogma and of authority and that through all these effects it improves the quality of our private and public life and, at times, the quality of public policy. Yet if the entry barriers to speaking freely are raised too high by the fear of public retribution and vilification, are we not in danger that some of the virtues of freedom of speech will be diminished without commensurate gain? There is no solution to this conundrum other than self- and other-awareness and apposite self-restraint, not of ideas but of rhetoric. Regulatory measures—other than individual, self-regulatory ones—are to be excluded. Any reading of the rhetoric, and of the blogger and email traffic, on all sides of the lacrosse case, however, makes clear that at many times such self-awareness, not to speak of self-restraint, has given way to a speech intended not to clarify but to embarrass, punish, demean or humiliate, a result which is likely to diminish the quality of speech over time and to undermine the advantages to individuals and the community of a free, open, intense, engaged but also respectful debate. My second concern is the way public discussion in the blogs and emails often moved from characterizations of what faculty have said or are alleged to have said to attacks on their persons, on their motives and even to hateful personal, threatening or racist rants. I have seen emails and blogs which attribute the views of a faculty member to the alleged weakness of his academic record, or the fact that she studies subject matters which the writer finds objectionable, or that attribute to the faculty member hidden motives of self-interest. These criticisms are often couched in language that reflects profound disrespect not only for the faculty member but for the university. Worthy of special mention  --  because they are so distasteful and beyond any form of acceptable speech - are the emails that I have seen in recent months which are nothing more, or less, than the anonymous racist  --  personally vilifying - rants sent primarily but not only to African American faculty members. Faculty members, like all of us, are responsible for what they say and must be prepared for the consequences of speaking freely. However, the rhetoric of these emails  --  so easily sent and far too easily dismissed as ravings from the fringe - are profoundly disturbing and sometimes debilitating to those who receive them. But, what does it do to our community when a subset of its members is singled out by their race, or any other quality other than the quality of their thinking, for speaking up? What does it do to our community when a sector of it feels tempted to withdraw because members of that sector are being pummeled for exercising their rights? What does it do to our community's ability to address serious issues within it with intelligence, balance, integrity, forthrightness and effectiveness when one or more sectors of it no longer feel like being a part of the community? And finally, what does it do to the likelihood that others in our community will speak their mind when they see that this has become the climate of speech, the potential consequence of speaking freely? When one sector of the community is isolated and publicly vilified, it tends to have a chilling effect on others, even those who are in profound disagreement. No one wants to think that speaking freely is likely to engender such attacks. Better, then, they may well think, to say nothing. But then we are all diminished and so too is our community. This is not acceptable. All of you as faculty  --  like all others in our community - have the right to express yourselves on issues of public concern like any other citizen. Additionally, as a leading and enduring members of the Duke community, you have a privileged status in expressing yourselves on issues of the university, the campus and the campus culture. The other side of this coin is you are part of a community with many different people and points of view, and it is our shared responsibility to extend mutual respect to each other so that speech may be as free and open as possible. We must ensure this if all voices are to be heard, all opinions counted in as we debate issues at the heart of our community and our mission. Thus my third concern: how we talk to and with each other. Universities are indeed communities. In a university like Duke with as much emphasis on interdisciplinarity, and hence on working with faculty to whom we are not bound by departmental affiliation and proximate space, and a university dependent on effective faculty governance, speaking freely and showing mutual respect—being good speakers and good listeners— giving each other the benefit of the doubt and probing further when someone says something which perplexes or distresses - are essential if debate is to be open, ideas and values advanced and honed, and campus life and the community enriched. In recent months we have lost some of our ability to exercise these qualities in speaking with one another. In the face of this decay some have become strident, harsh or unhearing; others have retreated from the public arena. There has been a diminished community debate, a narrowing of those willing to speak freely, a reduced sense of shared purpose to overcome our troubles, a loss of the confidence—so often a strength of Duke—that through a shared understanding and effort we can become a better institution. Yet now we need those qualities and that confidence more than ever. If the Campus Culture Initiative, where discussions of substance and quality have been going on since June, is to produce a successful report this spring, we must renew our ability to speak to each other with candor and respect about the issues of importance to our community. To regain it, we will need to recapture the values that sustain and enrich speaking freely and listening attentively and respectfully that have served us so well in the past. When we hear things we don't like, even things with which we strongly disagree, we need to judge the substance and not the person, assume the better rather than the worse of intentions. Finally, this brings me to the question of why the Provost has been silent as this situation has developed over the past few months. The answer is that I was concerned that public statements of defense of the rights of the faculty to speak in the face of the blogger and email attacks would only generate more of the same vituperative rhetoric which my speaking out would be intended to help quell. The merciless attention that the emailers and bloggers have been paying to every word uttered, syllabus crafted, and article authored suggested that an intervention by me might simply turn up the heat which seemed, at moments, to be cooling. Further, I feared that in the often tense and polarized atmosphere of our campus discourse, statements by the Provost, while intended to calm might simply further divide and be interpreted as "taking sides." This might well then run the danger of stifling other voices that needed to be heard. Finally, if the Provost is seen to be defending the content of the speech of faculty members, do we not run the danger that  some will come to think it is the right and responsibility of the administration to monitor what faculty say? Were these correct judgments? To tell you the truth, I do not know. They were taken in deep sincerity and with concern for those being hurt and real sadness at what was, and still is, happening to our community and its ability to reason together about the toughest, most divisive issues among us -- and what was happening to each of us and our zest to be a member of the Duke community. I do know that no decision to speak out at any time would have been without those same consequences of which I spoke earlier, some good and some undoubtedly bad. But, if not before, why now? With the passing of time, the heat has not gone down. In the last weeks, faculty members have shared with me emails and blog material that is as merciless, distorted and vituperative as in the past. The cumulative damage of the months of attacks on some of our faculty and the distress of those who sympathize with them is exceeding the limits of prudence about provoking external reactions. It is the Provost's job to defend the fundamental value and values of the faculty and at some point refraining from that defense because it might produce more of the same becomes itself imprudent. Third, we are entering the period when the Campus Culture Initiative will move from meetings room to the campus at large. Nothing about the developments in the lacrosse case diminishes the importance of paying critical attention to the culture on our campus and ways that it supports values that are central to our mission: inclusiveness, mutual respect, the personally and socially responsible use of alcohol, the effort to root out in our community attitudes or behaviors which reflect prejudice or disrespect based on race, gender, sexual preference or other group qualities, and the identification and elimination of structures that may foster such attitudes and behaviors. Think what a challenging agenda this sets for us. We will not accomplish it all and we will not accomplish it quickly. But Duke has, through this process, the opportunity to be a leader. It is, therefore, even more important now that we regain the powers of self-critical, optimistic, respectful and broad-based collective debate which have stood us so well in the past. The faculty must be on point, along with the students, in how we think about and arrive at the appropriate measures of reform for our campus culture. That can only happen if we recall how to speak freely to each other as we have in our best moments. To conclude, I wish the faculty well as we begin our new semester. We are here to teach, to study and to learn, and to do so at our best we need both the best climate possible on our campus and a degree of tranquility. May the new semester bring us much more of both.



Durham, NC - John F. Burness, senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke University, issued the following statement in response to Durham District Attorney Mike Nifong sending a letter to the state attorney general, asking to be recused from the Duke lacrosse case:    "We welcome the news that the district attorney has asked to be removed from this case. As President Brodhead has emphasized, this matter needs to be placed in the hands of an independent party who can restore confidence in the fairness and integrity of the legal process. We hope this change will lead to a fair and speedy resolution of this case."   



Durham, NC - I have now received the Report of the Campus Culture Initiative Steering Committee. It is the result of ten months of intensive work by twenty-four faculty, students, alumni and administrators led by Vice Provost for Undergraduate Education and Dean of Trinity College Robert Thompson (chair) and Vice President for Student Affairs Larry Moneta (vice-chair).  I am grateful to the committee and to the hundreds of community members who shared their thinking on the issues involved. I am also grateful to a second body I named last April, the President's Council chaired by former trustees Roy Bostock and Wilhelmina Reuben-Cooke, for providing advice on the Report's recommendations.    The committee and I hope that this document will launch a conversation, one in which all members of the Duke family are invited to participate. The questions for this conversation are deeply important: how can we create a Duke where every student will get the richest development of his or her personal powers while contributing to and benefiting from the larger community? How can we strengthen the values of inclusion, respect and mutual engagement?  How can we build on what's already excellent to make the best Duke we can imagine? Not everyone will agree on the details of every answer, but we need to recognize the value of the questions and have the courage to ask them.  In so doing, we continue a healthy Duke tradition of being willing to face up to hard questions in candid ways.    The Report focuses on undergraduate culture since that is our principal residential population. Many of the issues the Report highlights -- the role of alcohol in social life, for instance, or the experience of race and other forms of difference -- are challenges on every campus. That does not mean we should ignore them here. Other issues -- the dining model or the allocation of campus "real estate" -- are more Duke-specific.    In some areas, we have already begun to make progress on issues raised in the Report. The DukeEngage initiative announced two weeks ago will make major opportunities for civic engagement available to every undergraduate. Plans are already in hand to increase faculty-student interaction by adding faculty residences to West Campus. Athletics is a proud Duke tradition and I look forward (as the Report does) to our strong continuing participation in Division I competition, and to striving jointly for athletic and academic achievement. Getting the balance right requires fine tuning and knowledgeable faculty advice to the administration and Trustees, who have final oversight of athletics policy. A major revision of the Athletic Council that has been vetted by ECAC and approved by the Trustees will make its deliberations more substantive.    In other areas, processes already exist to deliberate and act on the Report's recommendations. For example, the suggestions regarding curriculum, admissions, and faculty culture will be referred to appropriate standing committees for their consideration.    Yet other recommendations will require new or modified facilities before they can be implemented. The Report underlines how much campus interaction depends on the availability of social and community spaces—last Friday's splendid campus-wide party in Bostock and Perkins Library and von der Heyden Pavilion was only one reminder of how new facilities can inspire new forms of community. The renovation of key sites on East and West Campus and the building of Central Campus are already high on our agenda. Through these efforts, Duke will have the opportunity to address many spatial needs for dining and social life.   Finally, there are recommendations that will require far more detailed study and discussion. There is nothing magic about the status quo system of housing assignment. It is only one logistical choice among many, and we should be willing to be imaginative. At the same time, Duke's selective housing system is quite varied, with a complex array of benefits and challenges. We must consider how to support all the strengths of our residential community as we review the assignment of housing.  I have asked Provost Peter Lange to lead the process of considering the Report and the issues it raises.  Working with others, he will orchestrate campus discussions and establish appropriate timetables for each set of issues. I have asked him to keep me informed and to deliver a full report by the middle of next term. At its meeting last weekend, the Board of Trustees discussed the Report and supported this approach to broadening the conversation, involving more students, as we resolve these issues.  The important thing now is to have the conversation the Report is meant to launch. None of its recommendations is a "done deal." Nor should any of its suggestions be off the table. This is a time for vigorous debate, which is a healthy thing in a university. The core values the report advocates are the promotion of active, independent thinking and education through engagement with those who think differently from ourselves. We will have a chance to build these strengths as we discuss how best to move forward.  Once again, I thank the committee for identifying issues that we must now address as a community, and I welcome this occasion to reach for the best that Duke can be.  Richard H. Brodhead President 



Durham, NC - I join with everyone who cares about justice in welcoming the North Carolina State Attorney General's announcement that the remaining charges have been dropped against David Evans, Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann. This announcement comes at the end of an extraordinarily painful year for the young men and their families. They have carried themselves with dignity through an ordeal of deep unfairness.    Let's be clear about what was said today. The Attorney General did not dismiss the allegations on narrow, equivocal or legalistic ground. He determined our students to be innocent of the charges and said they were "the tragic result of a rush to accuse." In short, he used the strongest language of vindication.    From the outset, I have been careful to note that these students were entitled to the presumption of innocence and I looked to the legal system to determine the merit of the charges. Now, finally, that process has given us a decision based on a thorough and objective review of the evidence. This is what we have all needed from the start. I trust the State Bar's review will be equally thorough so that we can understand the District Attorney's conduct in this case.  As for Duke, while not reliving the past year, we won't be afraid to go back and learn what we can from this difficult experience.  During the past year, the world has known these young men, their teammates and a great university largely through the filter of unproven allegations. I trust that today's decision will begin a new day for all involved.  



Durham, NC - Dear Members of the Duke University Community,  I write to you on behalf of the Trustees of Duke University. Today the North Carolina State Attorney General announced that all remaining charges against David Evans, Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann have been dropped and should never have been brought. This announcement explicitly and unequivocally establishes the innocence of David, Collin and Reade, who with their families have suffered an unimaginable year of accusation and public scrutiny. They deserve our respect for the honorable way they have conducted themselves during this long legal ordeal that ends with their exoneration.  The Attorney General determined that there was no credible evidence to support the charges that were brought, with so many statements of certainty, by the Durham District Attorney last spring.  Many have suffered from his actions, these three students and their families most of all.  The Attorney General's investigation places responsibility for this miscarriage of justice with the District Attorney, and we now look to the proceedings of the State Bar to call him to account before his peers.  Much as we wish that these three young men, their teammates and their families  --  and indeed the whole community of people who love Duke  --  could have been spared the agony of the past year, we believe that it was essential for the University to defer to the criminal justice system. As imperfect and flawed as it may be, it is that process that brings us today to this resolution. Throughout the past year President Richard Brodhead consulted regularly with the Trustees and has had our continuing support. He made considered and thoughtful decisions in a volatile and uncertain situation.  Each step of the way, the board agreed with the principles that he established and the actions he took.  As we look back  --  and with the benefit of what we now know  --  there is no question that there are some things that might have been done differently.  However, anyone critical of President Brodhead should be similarly critical of the entire board.   In closing, we express our relief for today's outcome and recognize the character that our three students, their teammates and all of their families have shown over the past year.   Furthermore, we hope that the resolution of this unfair, divisive and painful episode can serve to unite us all. There is much to learn from the events that we have lived through, and we intend to put this learning to use. Duke is a great university that steps up to challenges and opportunities, and together we will use this moment to make our community stronger.




Editor's Note: John F. Burness is senior vice president for public affairs and government relations at Duke 
Durham, NC -   "Attorney General Cooper's Summary of Conclusions that was released today documents the absence of any credible evidence that would justify any conclusion in this case other than the one Mr. Cooper announced a few weeks ago -- that David Evans, Collin Finnerty and Reade Seligmann are innocent of all charges brought against them last spring by District Attorney Nifong. We welcome this report as we welcomed the Attorney General's announcement on April 11.    "We now await the N.C. State Bar's review of the charges against Mr. Nifong for his conduct in this case."   

